Pierre L. van den Berghe

THE ETHNIC
PHENOMENON


1
INTRODUCTION:

THEORIES AND IDEOLOGIES
OF ETHNIC RELATIONS

It is probably fair to say that the academic specialty usually called "race
and ethnic relations" is rich in literature but poor in theory. The same might
be said of the social sciences as a whole, with the partial exception of
economics and linguistics. In my view, the two main reasons for this state
of affairs are that the social sciences are riddled with ideology, and that they
have so long divorced themselves from the life sciences. They have treated
the study of human social behavior as a phenomenon almost entirely sui
generis—disembodied from the evolution of the human organism. The two
reasons are interrelated and their effects are especially evident in the field
of race and ethnic relations, which has long been in the maelstrom of political controversy.

IDEOLOGICAL AND INTELLECTUAL CURRENTS
Concern for "racial" and cultural differences between human groups, and
for the consequences thereof in terms of behavior and interaction, antedates
the birth of the social sciences as self-conscious disciplines in the second
half of the 19th century. The philosophes of the 18th century were preoccupied with questions of racial and cultural differences and tended to be
Lamarckians and climatic determinists. Peoples differed in customs, temperatment and appearance because they lived in different climes and passed
on to their descendants the different characteristics acquired in their different geographical settings. Sages of the Enlightenment, like Thomas Jefferson (especially in his Notes on Virginia), wavered back and forth between
what today we might call genetic and environmental explanations of human
differences, but they tended to lean on the environmental side of the fence.
By the middle, and increasingly in the second half, of the 19th century,
the European and American social science traditions entered into a phase
of genetic determinism, giving rise to racism and social Darwinism (Hof-stadter, 1959; Gossett, 1963; Banton, 1977). Human differences in behavior,
abilities, character and culture were now attributed principally to in-born
differences in biological make-up. A theory of genetic determinism and
evolution was being developed 50 years or so before Gregor Mendel's discovery of the genes themselves was rediscovered in 1900. Through the
influence of scholars like Herbert Spencer in England and William Graham
Sumner in the United States, the social sciences entered a phase of racism
and social Darwinism that was to dominate the social sciences during the
last quarter of the 19th and the first quarter of the 20th century.
Then, the intellectual pendulum began to swing once more in the environmentalist direction. By the 1920s and 1930s, the United States had become the centerstage of the social sciences, and the students of Franz Boas
in anthropology and Robert Park in sociology began to spread the gospel of
extreme cultural relativism and determinism that held sway through the
1960s. The political and ideological context of this triumphant cultural
determinism was as clear and as evident as that of the social Darwinism of
the previous epoch. Much as social Darwinism first became the ideology of
laissez-faire capitalism and finally found its political expression in Fascism
and Nazism, environmentalism and cultural determinism served the political ends of the Communist-liberal alliance of the Second World War.
Many landmark studies of, and statements about, race and ethnic relations
in the quarter-century following the outbreak of World War II bear an unmistakable ideological imprint. German anti-Fascist refugees like Theodore
Adorno et al. (1950) influenced a whole generation of studies of the "authoritarian personality." A Swedish Social Democrat, Gunnar Myrdal
(1944), was commissioned to study the "Negro problem" in America and
predictably pronounced it a white problem. A leading French-Belgian intellectual, Claude Levi-Strauss (1952), published under UNESCO auspices,
the official United Nations line on "race." The American anthropologist,
Charles Wagley (1952), was sponsored by UNESCO to study race relations
in the supposedly tolerant Brazil. The great American liberals of the period—W. Lloyd Warner (1941), Gordon Allport (1954), E. Franklin Frazier
(1957), Otto Klineberg (1944), John Dollard (1939) and many others—all
presented a monolithic ideological front—a genuine party line on race and
ethnicity. Indeed, that tradition still largely holds sway today in America
and Europe.

The liberal tradition in race and ethnic relations held these truths to be,

if not self-evident, at least established beyond reasonable doubt:
1. All humans are members of a single species, and there are no biologically
meaningful subspecies within it. "Races" are social constructs corresponding to no biological reality.
2. Differences between human populations are smaller than within them,
and such differences as exist (e.g. in l.Q. test performance) are largely
if not entirely the product of the social environment.
3. Racism and ethnocentrism are irrational, dysfunctional attitudes, if not
downright aberrations, to which certain rigid, authoritarian types of personality are especially prone. Such attitudes must be combatted through
a social therapy promoting equal status contact between groups.
These tenets were part of a general social science world view that nearly
all human behavior could be explained in terms of learning, conditioning,
socialization, acculturation—in short, the cultural environment. Suggestions that one should also look at the genetic evolution of man. as one
species of organism interacting with many others in a physical and biotic
milieu as well as in a cultural environment of his own making, were clearly
unfashionable and drew considerable ideological fire.
Along with that environmentalist creed went, in many cases, an assimilationist ideology. The notion of the "melting pot" and the experience of
European immigrants groups in the industrial cities of North America in the
late 19th and early 20th centuries had given rise to Park's "Chicago school,"
which saw assimilation as the final phase of the "race relation cycle" (Park,
1950). For a wide variety of reasons, assimilationism seemed a convenient
and ostensibly liberal way of solving "minority problems" for the ruling
classes of centralized, bureaucratic states, whether capitalist or socialist. To
be sure, some anthropologists, fearing the disappearance of "natives" to be
studied, continued to plead the cause of cultural diversity, but the main
thrust of social science thinking during that era was that ethnic and social
sentiments were, on the whole, bad. The value judgment was generally
hidden under pretentious jargon such as "particularism," "traditionalism"
and "tribalism," but the general view was that race and ethnicity were
dysfunctional in industrial societies, represented traditional residues of
previous eras and would therefore be eroded by the forces of urbanization,
industrialization, modernization and all those impressive-sounding processes so dear to the functionalists.
A very similar ideology developed in the Marxist tradition and was translated into "nationality policy" in the communist countries. The Marxist
tradition, with the exception of Lenin, was notoriously unsuccessful in
addressing problems of ethnicity, attempting to reduce them to class problems and treating them as residuals of capitalism to be supplanted by proletarian internationalism.
As for the "new nations" of Asia and Africa, and the highly centralized
Napoleonic states of Latin America, they also found environmentalism and
assimilationism a convenient doctrine to squash separatist movements and
to foster "national" unity. A neat semantic trick of semantic mislabeling
took place here with the nearly universal cooperation of Western social
scientists. All states were now declared to be nation-states. The real nations
within these artificial multinational creations of European colonialism were
proclaimed to be mere "tribes," and any genuine nationalism that might
develop within them was stigmatized as "tribalism." As for the amorphous,
anticolonial ideology of the new ruling classes of the Third World, it was
dignified with the label of "nationalism." Ethnic groups could now be suppressed, short of physical extermination, with the blessings of the United
Nations.

In the late 1960s, and increasingly in the 1970s, the ideological climate
changed once more, and social science followed, once again, like a weather
vane. The United States and, to a lesser extent, other industrial societies
like Canada and Britain went on an ethnic binge. The very word "ethnicity"
was coined during that period. It became fashionable to discover, cultivate
and cuddle "ethnic identities" and "roots." "Nationalist" movements (e.g.
"black nationalism" in the United States) sprang up, and governments,
universities and intellectuals followed suit with alacrity with quota systems,
affirmative action, ethnic studies programs, offices of minority affairs and
the like. All of a sudden, social scientists began to proclaim that the melting
pot had failed and had been a sham to start with, that ethnic identities were
precious, that assimilationism was a sinister policy of "ethnocide," and that
the state should give full recognition to ethnic and racial sentiments and
should base its policies of resource distribution on criteria of race and
ethnicity. In the 1950s, for example, any social scientist who suggested that
American blacks were anything but darkly pigmented, poor and oppressed
Anglo-Saxons was called a romantic at best—a fascist at worst. By the late
1960s, social scientists were busy discovering black soul, black culture,
black English and so on. Some, like Arthur Jensen (1969), went as far as to

discover a special kind of black in

All these ideological twists and convolutions would be merely amusing
if they were not fraught with practical consequences. Although it is probably
true that social scientists have followed, rather than preceded, public opinion, political pressures and government policies, they have certainly provided an impressive array of pseudoscientific findings to support whatever
was fashionable. The common charge of radicals that social science has
always been a handmaiden of power and mainstay of the status quo is not
always correct. For instance, in South Africa, social scientists have generally
been far to the left of the government. But there is no doubt about social
scientists' susceptibility to intellectual fashions, uncritical acceptance of
views that support their ideology, and blind resistance to evidence that
seems to challenge established beliefs.

The events of the seventies threw the overwhelmingly liberal academic

establishment in the United States into a quandary. The great liberal coalition of blacks, Jews, students and intellectuals forged during the integrationist phase of the civil rights movements was effectively shattered in the
late 1960s by the rise of black "nationalism." Many intellectuals were alienated by civil rights issues. A few timidly reasserted the old liberal ideology of meritocracy, universalism and complete equality of individual
rights, but they were clearly out of fashion. Those traditional liberals who
wanted to remain in favor had to do an ideological somersault: they now
had to support racial classification, ethnic quotas, reverse discrimination
and policies based on treating people not according to individual merit or
need, but according to group membership. The revival of feminism gave rise
to a politically unrealistic coalition of "women and minorities," half-heartedly and ineptly bolstered by federal bureaucrats, but the new coalition fell
apart almost as rapidly as it formed. By the time the inevitable white and
traditional backlash got organized against blacks and other minorities (e.g.
the "white ethnic" movement and the antibusing movement) and against
feminism (e.g. the anti-ERA and the "Right to Life" movements), ideological
and political disarray, anomie and cynicism reigned in the academic establishment that once espoused the civil rights movement and provided a wellintegrated rationale for it. Such has been the background that led me to a
search for a more satisfying approach to race and ethnicity.

THE NEED FOR A BROADER PARADIGM:
GENES, ENVIRONMENT AND CULTURE
Increasingly over the last decade, it became clear to me that it was not
enough to compare human societies with each other—and most assuredly
not from the culturally determinist perspective that still dominates the social
sciences. An understanding of many fundamental features of human behavior will continue to elude us unless we compare our behavior with that
of other species. Indeed, how else are we to determine the nature of human
nature, except by establishing similarities and differences with other species? Most social scientists either flatly deny that there is such a thing as
human nature or, while granting its existence, proceed to ignore it and to
take it for granted. Most social scientists are still content to declare our
species sufficiently unique as to limit drastically the value of cross-specific
comparisons and as to justify the continued isolation of the social sciences
from biology. Most social scientists continue to subscribe to an almost infinitely plastic model of human behavior, shaped overwhelmingly by the
cultural environment created by man himself. In my view, these basic premises of so many social scientists are quite untenable and are rapidly rendered
obsolete by recent d e v e l o p m e n t s in sociobiology (Barash, 1977; Daly and

Wilson, 1978; Dawkins, 1976; Shepher, 1980; van den Berghe, 1979a; Edward O. Wilson, 1975, 1978).
In several other places, I have suggested a broader framework for the study
of human behavior (van den Berghe, 1978a, 1978b, 1978c, 1979a). Here I
shall give a mere sketch of it. Human behavior must be analyzed at three
distinct but interrelated levels: (1) genetic, (2) ecological and (3) cultural.
First, like all other organisms, we have evolved biologically through natural selection. The fundamental mechanism for natural selection is the differential reproduction of alternative alleles of given genes. This is obvious
enough when we consider our anatomy and physiology. Many social scientists even readily concede that human capabilities (for deductive reasoning, symbolic language, culture and so on) have evolved biologically. The
overwhelming majority, however, vigorously deny that our behavior continues to be under genetic control. Instead, they argue, despite evidence to
the contrary, that, once the capability for symbolic language and culture
developed, culture almost entirely took over as a mechanism of evolution,
and that human behavior, by some magic, became infinitely plastic and totally freed of genetic constraints. There is no denying the importance of
culture, but culture is a superstructure that builds on a biological substratum. Culture grows out of biological evolution; it does not wipe the biological slate clean and start from scratch.
Second, like all other organisms, we evolved in adaptive response to a
multitude of environmental conditions. The phenotype (appearance) of an
organism is the product of the interaction of genotype (genetic make-up)
and environment. Darwinian evolutionary theory, far from disregarding ecological conditions, is inconceivable without systematic attention to environmental factors. Only naive social scientists oppose heredity and
environment; biologists see them as the two complementary sides of the
same evolutionary coin. Ecological factors are complex and multiple; they
include physical conditions of climate, altitude, space, light, water, salinity
and so on, and the biotic environment made up of other animal and plant
species, which may be parasites, prey or symbionts. The environment is
internal to the organism as well as external, for it includes endoparasites.
Indeed, even the genes have a complex interaction effect on each other and
can thus be said to constitute part of each others' environment.
For humans, however, the story does not stop there. There is a third
crucial element necessary to an understanding of human behavior and human evolution. Our species has developed an impressive bag of tricks, called
culture, to control, modify, indeed, create an important part of our environment. Culture is part of our environment, but it differs from the rest of
it in being created and transmitted by our own species according to mechanisms fundamentally different from genetic natural selection. Cultural evolution is much faster than biological evolution, and its transmission is
Lamarckian rather than Darwinian. Acquired cultural characteristics, unlike
in genetic evolution, can be transmitted, modified, transformed or eliminated through social learning. Cultural artifacts can be passed on and utilized from individual to individual through nongenetic inheritance.
Culture is important but not aJJ-important. It cannot be divorced from
either ecology or genetics. All three levels are intertwined. Genes are selected through environmental pressures, and they impose limits on culture.
Culture grows out of biological evolution and responds to multiple environmental forces, but it also shapes the ecology and therefore the biological
evolution of our entire planet. Nothing is gained by trying to maintain a
categorical distinction between nature and nurture.
The most fundamental question posed by the social sciences is the question of human sociality itself, or what has often been called the "problem
of order." Why and under what conditions do humans cooperate? Why is
not human existence a war of all against all, at least not all the time?
Cooperation and conflict have long been regarded in the social sciences as
two sides of a single reality, but it is now becoming apparent that human
sociality is a special case of animal sociality in general. Humans, in short,
compete and cooperate for much the same reasons as other animals. Or-

7
ganisms compete with each other for scarce resources that are convertible
into the ultimate currency of biological evolution: fitness—defined as reproductive success. Natural selection operates through a process of differential reproduction, for it is through differential reproduction that different
alleles of the same genes change their relative proportions in successive
generations of an animal population.

KIN SELECTION AND INCLUSIVE FITNESS
As Dawkins (1976) so elegantly argued, the ultimate unit of biological selection—that is, the smallest unit of genetic material that replicates itself—is
the gene. But genes are not free-floating. They are bunched together in
chromosomes, which are themselves carried in these little bags of protoplasm we call cells, which are in turn clumped together in more or less
complex organisms, i.e. individual plants and animals. When we study
behavior, the most convenient unit of analysis is that enormously complex
and differentiated assemblage of genes and cells that makes up the individual organism. From the point of view of evolution by natural selection,
however, change takes place at the genie level, and organisms are but ephemeral "survival machines" (in Dawkins' phrase) for potentially eternal genes.

An organism is but a gene's way of replicating itself

reproductio

Genes cannot be directly observed to behave, however. Rather, genes have
an effect on the behavior of organisms (often complex, indirect and flexibly
modified by environmental conditions). We can only infer the effect of genes
from the phenotypic behavior of individual animals or plants. Since organisms are survival machines for genes, by definition those genes that program organisms for successful reproduction will spread. To maximize their
reproduction, genes program organisms to do two things: successfully compete against, and thereby hinder reproduction of, organisms that carry alternative alleles of the genes in question, and successfully cooperate with
(and thereby contribute to the reproduction of) organisms that share the
same alleles of the genes. In simpler terms, the degree of cooperation between organisms can be expected to be a direct function of the proportion
of the genes they shave: conversely, the degree of conflict between them is
an inverse function of the proportion of shared genes.
This formulation at the genie level can be made more intuitively understandable by expressing it from the perspective of the organism. Whenever
cooperation increases individual fitness, organisms are genetically selected
to be nepotistic, in the sense of favoring kin over nonkin. and close kin over
distant kin. The more closely related organisms are, the higher the proportion of the genes they share. Therefore, genes that favor nepotistic behavior
in organisms will enhance their own replication more effectively than genes
favoring random cooperation. The more closely the beneficiary of a nepotistic act is related to the nepotist, the higher the probability that a given

8
gene is present in both of them. By increasing the fitness of relatives through
nepotism, the nepotist indirectly enhances the reproduction of his genes via
his kin.
We shall return to this genetically selected propensity for nepotism, also
called kin selection, in the next chapter, for it seems to underlie much
animal sociality (including human) and is of central interest to our subject
matter. There is now overwhelming evidence, ranging from social insects
to vertebrates, that animal societies are held together in good part by nepotism (E. O. Wilson, 1975). Related animals enhance each others' fitness by
cooperating. Animals are social to the extent that they increase their fitness
by staying together (e.g. to nurture their young, defend against predators,
or forage and hunt more effectively). If, in addition to cooperating, they
favor their kin, they further enhance their fitness by fostering not only their
own direct reproduction, but also the reproduction of relatives who share
a proportion of their genes. Kin selection, though a partially conscious
process in humans, need not, of course, be conscious, and in fact is probably
not conscious in most animals. Nepotism is blindly selected for because
nepotistic individuals in social species have higher fitness than nonnepotistic ones. This is equally true whether the nepotism is conscious (as in
humans) or unconscious.
RECIPROCITY
Nepotism is not the whole story of animal sociality. Unrelated animals also
cooperate, even across different species, as when they establish a symbiotic
relationship. Some fish for instance let smaller fish enter their mouths with
impunity to allow them to eat their parasites. Sexual reproduction itself is
a basic form of cooperation between frequently unrelated animals. Typically,
mating and reproduction take complex and protracted cooperation between
male and female, involving at least some of the following: courtship, copulation, nest building, provisioning the young and defending territory. At
a minimum, the female has to stay in place long enough for the copulation
to take place, but generally the cooperation is much more extensive than
that; females, for example, often actively seek and/or signal their readiness
to mate to males.
In short, even unrelated animals cooperate when it is mutually beneficial
for them to do so, that is, when cooperation increases fitness. The basis for
that cooperation may be termed reciprocity. Humans, being the intelligent
animals they are, have developed systems of reciprocity well beyond the
level of complexity found in other species. Humans are highly self-conscious
animals, capable of self-consciously pursuing their interests. Therefore, their
systems of reciprocity typically involve some kind of mental "book-keeping" of favors given and returned—a balance sheet of gifts extended and
received. Such book-keeping presupposes, of course, two cerebral capabilities (which we probably share with many other higher vertebrates): long-

g
term memory and recognition of individuals. Although, in industrial societies, that ability of individual recognition is often taxed beyond our biological potential, any human of normal intelligence has no difficulty
recognizing several hundred individuals with whom he interacts regularly.
Until a few thousand years ago, the size limits of recognition were roughly
coterminous with the size of human societies.
Reciprocity can, of course, operate between kin, but unlike kin selection,
it is not limited to kin. It thus greatly extends the limits of human sociality.
There is, however, a catch to reciprocity, especially to self-conscious reciprocity of the human type: it is open to cheating or free-loading. The temptation not to return a favor received is irresistible. Therefore, systems of
self-conscious reciprocity have to detect and control cheating, excluding
cheaters from subsequent interactions. This, in turn, selects for more and
more complex and subtle forms of cheating, hence, for increasingly sophisticated detection devices, and so on, ad infinitum. The evolution of
complex human systems of reciprocity was probably one of the major selective forces for the growth of human intelligence beyond the simian or
australopithecine level.
Many animals have evolved simple and presumably unconscious forms
of deceit, such as camouflage and mimicry of a predator or of a dangerous
prey. Monkeys and apes are perhaps intelligent enough to evolve rudimentary forms of conscious deception and are certainly not easily fooled by
crude forms of human deceit. But humans are deceitful on a scale that
dwarfs anything we know in the rest of the animal world.
The ultimate individual form of human deceit is self-deceit. Since we
have developed very subtle ways of detecting lying and cheating in fellow
humans, lying itself is a difficult art. It follows, then, that the most effective
way of telling a lie, especially a self-serving one, is to be convinced that
you are, in fact, telling the truth. The ultimate forms of collective self-deceit
developed by our species are religion and ideology. Religion is the denial
of mortality. Ideology is a sophisticated belief system the purpose of which
is to facilitate the transmission of credible, self-serving lies. Religion is
universal to human culture because the rise of self-consciousness in our
species inevitably brought with it intimations of mortality, and therefore,
the existential need to deny death. Ideology is more characteristic of statelevel societies because the creation of a state necessarily entails the divergence of class interests between the rulers and the ruled. Ideologies and
counterideologies serve the defense of class interests. In state societies,
religion itself broadens its functions to become an ideology. State religions
are no longer simply answers to the existential fear of death, but rationalizations for the status quo and, therefore, a form of ideology. However, even
in classless societies rudimentary ideologies can be found in defense of
group interests. Ethnocentrism is one such rudimentary ideology, and so
are sexism and "ageism." Men use rudimentary ideologies to control women,
and adults to control children.

10

COERCION
The common denominator of much ideology, then, is that it seeks to hide
or to justify asymmetrical relationships, that is, relationships in which a
fitness gain to ego is achieved at some cost to alter. Asymmetrical (or parasitic) relationships can only be maintained through deceit, coercion or a
combination of the two. Deceit, as we saw, is endemic in systems of reciprocity. But systems of reciprocity are vulnerable not only to deceit: they
are also open to coercion. To the extent that power imbalances exist in a
reciprocal interaction, reciprocity can easily be transformed into coercion.
Again, coercion is not a human monopoly. Male animals use force or
threats to displace or eliminate competition, to gain access to females in
oestrus, to secure submission of subordinates and so on. Some intelligent
mammals, such as baboons and lions, are even capable of forming small
coalitions of two to four males in order to establish and maintain a collective
dominance over individual rivals. Some animal societies can thus be said
to have rudimentary "ruling classes." Humans do, however, hold pride of
place in their ability to use to good effect conscious, collective, organized,
premeditated coercion in order to establish, maintain and perpetuate systems of intraspecific parasitism.
In stateless societies, collectively organized violence has a long history.
Hominids early became both predator and prey to their own species. Beyond
killing and eating each other, early hominids perhaps began to steal each
others' women as well. With the development of agriculture and animal
husbandry, the stakes were raised. Human male groups, now larger, better
organized and better armed, waged endemic warfare over women, livestock
and territory. The rise of states marked the extension of the realm of coercion
and parasitism within societies as well as between them. Indeed, the very
essence of the state is the centralization of power in the hands of the few
in order to extract surplus production from the many, within the same
society, Police, courts, taxation, forced labor and slavery are so many coercive institutions that thrive together with the development of states. The
history of the last six or seven millenia is the history of the rise of bigger
and bigger states, ever better organized and armed for outside aggression
and internal coercion.
To summarize, I suggested that we look at human behavior in broad
evolutionary perspective. Homo sapiens evolved as one species among
many—through a process of natural selection similar to that of other animals.
This is as true of human behavior as of human anatomy. Like those of other
animals, human genes were selected in adaptive response to a multiplicity
of ecological conditions. Out of this process of natural selection grew a set
of specifically human capabilities we call culture. Culture is our species'
way of evolving and adapting much faster than would be possible by genetic
selection alone. But culture is part and parcel of nature and cannot be
dissociated from it.

11

Like other animal societies, human societies are held together by the selfinterest of their individual members. This self-interest is best measured in
terms of reproductive success, for it is through differential reproduction that
biological evolution of all life forms takes place. Individuals, human or
nonhuman, interact competitively or cooperatively to maximize their individual fitness. They do so in three basic ways: through kin selection,
reciprocity and coercion. The human variations on these three basic mechanisms are much more complex than those observable in other species, but
they are not categorically different. Self-consciousness—that outstanding
characteristic of human behavior—is probably present to some extent in
apes and perhaps in other intelligent mammals as well. Certainly, many
higher vertebrates (birds and mammals) show a considerable ability to learn
through experience, to modify their behavior accordingly and to transmit
socially their innovations—all features once thought unique to human culture. Even the capacity to use symbolic language is present in rudimentary
form in apes, although apes do not seem to use symbolic language under
natural conditions.
T H E SOCIOBIOLOGICAL PARADIGM
This sketch of an approach to the study of human behavior attempts to
integrate the biological and social sciences into a single evolutionary paradigm. It places our species squarely in the vast planetary ecosystem where
it belongs, together with millions of other evolving species. In some respects,
we are genuinely unique, but then so is every species, otherwise it would
not be a species. In most respects, we are different from other species only
in degree.
Since the publication of E. O. Wilson's book (1975), the label "sociobiology" has gained increasing acceptance to describe the approach presented here. The same general neo-Darwinian approach to the study of
behavior has also been termed "ethology," "behavioral biology," "behavioral ecology" and "biosociology." Each of these labels has a slightly different connotation because it has been attached to different groups of
scientists doing slightly different research with somewhat different emphases. Labels matter little. What matters is that we improve our understanding of our own behavior. This has not only theoretical appeal: it seems
to become increasingly a necessary condition to our very biological survival.
We are seemingly the victims of our success as the dominant species of our
planet. We have created for ourselves an environment drastically different
from the one under which our previous evolution took place. In the process
we are not only damaging the biosphere upon which our survival depends;
we are unleashing ecological changes at a rate that increasingly outpaces
our biological capabilities to adjust.
No doubt, in the long run, our species is as doomed as dodos and dinosaurs. It is only a matter of time before all life forms become unsustainable

12
on our planet. But in the last couple of centuries we seem bent on accelerating the pace of our extinction. Unless we learn to modify our behavior
(including all kinds of behavior, such as aggression and uncontrolled reproduction, which were once adaptive but have now become catastrophic)
we will all be in serious trouble much sooner than many of us expect. To
modify our behavior we need to understand it; that is, we must understand
what kind of an animal we are. This, in turn, we cannot do in the abstract.
We can only do so successfully by comparing ourselves across human societies and across other species. Only then we will be able to establish the
parameters of the human condition.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Among the standard general overviews of the field of race and ethnic relations from
a broad cross-cultural point of view are Banton (1967). Mason (1970,1971), Rex (1970)
and van den Berghe (1978a), at a more introductory level, and Francis (1976), Le Vine
and Campbell (1972), and Schermerhorn (1970), in a more analytical vein. For a
sweeping critique of American race and ethnic relations studies from a sociology of
knowledge perspective, see Bash (1979).

1
AN
EXPLANATORY
FRAMEWORK

This page intentionally left blank

2
ETHNICITY AS KIN SELECTION:
THE BIOLOGY OF NEPOTISM

The notion that ethnicity has something to do with kinship or "blood" is
not new. Indeed, descent seems to be, implicitly and very often explicitly,
the essential element of the definition of those groups of "significant others"
that go under a wide variety of labels: tribe, band, horde, deme. ethnic
group, race, nation and nationality. This is clearly the case in the Western
tradition where the ideology of nationalism is replete with the rhetoric of
kinship: fellow ethnics refer to each other as brothers and sisters: soldiers
are said to die for the mare putrie or the Vaterland, depending on the gender
ascribed by language to the collective parent: mystical notions of blood are
said to be shared by members of one nation and to differentiate them from
other groups.
True, the legacy of two world wars and of virulent racism in Nazi Germany
somewhat dampened nationalist fervor in some intellectual circles in Europe and America during the 1950s and early 1960s. No sooner did intellectuals pronounce nationalism dead or dying in the "advanced" industrial
countries, however, than it resurfaced within long-established states in the
form of multitudinous movements for regional autonomy, ethnic separatism,
racial pride, cultural identity and the like.
Nor is the irrepressible nature of ethnic sentiments a uniquely Western
perversion. The most common origin myth of "primitive" societies ascribes
the birth of the nation to an ancestral couple, divinely created or descended.
In the simplest form of the myth, the ancestral couple is thought of as the
progenitors of the entire society. In stratified societies, the royal family often
attempts to monopolize divine ancestry, but then it quickly makes up for
it by claiming paternity over its subjects.
For the followers of the monotheistic religions of Judaism. Christianity
and Islam, the Book of Genesis serves as origin myth, and Adam and Eve
as the ancestral couple. More specifically, Muslims and Jews see themselves
as decendants of Abraham. Those groups have now become so large and so

16
diverse that these putative ancestors are no longer very meaningful to many
contemporary followers of these religions, but the Biblical origin myths are
in fact quite similar to those of other traditions. For example, the Yoruba
of Southwestern Nigeria place their own origin (which in typical ethnocentric manner, they identify with the origin of mankind) in their sacred city
of the He Ife. The earth was created at lie Ife by Oduduwa, one of the main
divinities of the Yoruba pantheon, on instructions from Olorun the supreme
deity. Oduduwa came down to the earth he created, sired sixteen sons who
became the founders of the various Yoruba kingdoms and the ancestors of
all the.Yoruba people (Bascom, 1969).
The Navajo, an indigenous American group inhabiting the southwestern
United States, have a complex myth in which Changing Woman, the principal figure among the supernatural Holy People, was magically impregnated by the rays of the Sun and by water from a waterfall and gave birth
to twin sons, Hero Twins, who first dwelt with their father, the Sun. Holy
People later descended to earth where they created Earth Surface People,
the ancestors of the Navajos, and taught them culture, i.e. the Navajo way
of life (Kluckhohn and Leighton, 1958).
The Pathan, stateless agriculturalists and pastoralists of Afghanistan and
Pakistan, clearly define their ethnicity in terms of descent in patrilineal line
from a common ancestor. Qais, who lived some 20 to 25 generations ago,
and was a contemporary of Prophet Mohammed from whom he embraced
the Muslim faith. A Pathan is thus a descendant of Qais in the male line
who is Muslim and conforms to Pathan customs (Fredrik Barth, 1959, 1969).
Even a large centralized state like Japan has a traditional nationalist myth
whereby all Japanese are descended from the same common ancestor of
whom the Imperial Family represent the line of direct descent, and all the
other families of Japan represent collateral branches formed by younger sons
of earlier generations. The entire nation is, thus, one single vast lineage
(Dore, 1958). In the words of a Hozumi Nobushige, a Japanese writing in
1898, "The Emperor embodies the Spirit of the Original Ancestor of our
race. . . . In submitting to the Emperor of a line which has persisted through
the ages, we subjects are submitting to the Spirit of the Joint Parent of our
Race, the Ancestor of our ancestors." IQuoted by Dore (1958, p. 94).] This
"blood ideology," as Hayashida (1976) called it, has been the essential
defining element of Japanese nationhood for centuries.
Examples could be multiplied, but these few illustrations from widely
scattered parts of the world will suffice. Ethnicity is common descent, either
real or putative, but, even when putative, the myth has to be validated by
several generations of common historical experience.
When most of the world's "traditional" societies became incorporated in
the colonial empires of European or neo-European countries, ideologues
and social scientists of both right and left believed that ethnic sentiments
would become increasingly vestigial, and that "modernity" (or "socialist
internationalism" in the communist societies) would engulf petty particularisms, giving rise to ever wider and more rational bases of solidarity based

17
on market forces, proletarian consciousness, Third World brotherhood or
whatever.
Few, if any, of these expectations came to pass. When imperial rule was
securely established, it often managed to suppress emergent nationalisms
by violence, but no sooner did these imperial systems collapse in the aftermath of war or revolution than did ethnic sentiments burst forth. Ironically,
the only large empire to have emerged relatively intact from the postimperial
turmoil of the two world wars is that of the Czars. Even the new successor
states to the European colonial empires have been rent by ethnic dissidence:
Nigeria, Zaire, India, Pakistan and Malaysia—to name but a few. Nor were
the smaller imperial systems spared the threat of ethnic separatism when
the traditional system of rule collapsed, as witnessed by the events of the
1970s in Ethiopia and Iran. Even centuries of centralized despotism cannot
suppress ethnic sentiment.
The position that ethnicity is a deeply rooted affiliation is often labeled
"primordialist" in social science. Articulated by Max Weber (1968, first
published in 1922), and later by Geertz (1967a) and Shils (1957), the primordialist position was under severe attack in the 1950s and 1960s when
most social scientists treated ethnicity as one affiliation among many—highly
changeable and responsive to circumstances. The Marxists viewed ethnicity
as an epiphenomenon, a remnant of precapitalist modes of production, a
false consciousness masking class interests, a mystification of ruling classes
to prevent the growth of class consciousness (Cox, 1948). To functionalists
and other non-Marxists, ethniticy was also a premodern phenomenon, a
residue of particularism and ascription incompatible with the trend toward
achievement, universalism and nationality supposedly exhibited by industrial societies (Deutsch, 1966).
All the bad things said of ethnicity were of course ascribed a fortiori to
race. Sentiments of group-belonging, based on physical attributes, were held
to be even more wrong-headed and heinous than group membership based
upon cultural attributes, such as language, religion and other customs—the
usual diacritica of ethnicity (Comas, 1972; Glazer, 1975; Gossett, 1963; Hofstadter, 1959; Leo Kuper, 1975; Levi-Strauss, 1952; van den Berghe, 1965).
Only recently, with the revival of ethnicity, is the "primordialist" position
once more being stated (Francis, 1976; Keyes, 1976).
The conventional primordialist position on ethnicity was vulnerable on
two scores:
1. It generally stopped at asserting the fundamental nature of ethnic sentiment without suggesting any explanation of why that should be the
case. As a theoretical underpinning, the primordialists had nothing better
to fall back on than the nebulous, romantic, indeed sometimes racist
ideologies of nationalists to which the primordialists pointed as illustrations of their contention. What kind of mysterious and suspicious
force was this "voice of the blood" that moved people to tribalism, racism
and ethnic intolerance?

18
2. If ethnicity was primordial, then was it not also ineluctable and immutable? Yet, patently, ethnic sentiments waxed and waned according to
circumstances. Ethnicity could be consciously manipulated for personal
gain. Ethnic boundaries between groups are sometimes quite fluid.
Smaller groups often merge into larger ones and vice-versa. New ethnic
groups constantly arise and disappear, and individuals may choose to
assert ethnic identities or not as their interests or fancies dictate. How
is all this circumstantial fluidity reconcilable with the primordialist position?
In contrast to the primordialist view of ethnicity, there came to be formulated the "instrumentalist" or "circumstantialist" position that held ethnicity to be something manipulable, variable, situationally expressed,
subjectively defined and only one possible type of affiliation among many
(Brass, 1974, 1976). One of the leading exponents of this position is Fredrik
Barth, who in his classical introduction to Ethnic Groups and Boundaries
(1969), explicitly defines ethnicity in subjective terms. Ethnicity is whatever
the natives say it is. It is the natives' perceptions of reality that create and
define ethnic boundaries and ethnic relations. It just happens that the Pathans whom Barth studied so extensively define their ethnicity in terms of
descent from a common ancestor; that ethnographic fact does not invalidate
Barth's position. Indeed, nothing can, if the analytical categories used in
social science must always be defined by the natives who, in turn, are, by
definition, always right! The problem for those of us who try to formulate
scientific propositions, is that natives do not always agree with each other,
even within cultures, and that therefore a science of human behavior base
exclusively on native opinion tends to be shaky.
As most controversies based on a simple-minded antimony, the primordialist-instrumentalist debate serves little purpose other than to help Ph.D
candidates organize their examination answers. It is one of the main aims
of this book to show that both positions are correct, although not necessarily
in the way the protagonists envisaged, and that the two views complement
each other. In Chapter 3, we shall see that ethnicity is indeed situationally
variable, according to a multiplicity of ecological conditions. And, in Chapter 4, we shall examine the many ways in which ethnicity is manipulated
in power relationships. Before I turn to the ecology and politics of ethnicity,
and thereby vindicate the instrumentalists, however, a theoretical basis for
the primordialist position must be developed. Briefly, I suggest that there
now exists a theoretical paradigm of great scope and e x p l a n a t o r y
power—evolutionary biology—that sheds a new light on phenomena of ethnocentrism and racism. In so doing, I am fully cognizant of the protest that
such an endeavor will elicit.
My basic argument is quite simple: ethnic and racial sentiments are extension of kinship sentiments. Ethnocentrism and racism are thus extended
forms of nepotism—the propensity to favor kin over nonkin. There exists
a general behavioral predisposition, in our species as in many others, to

19
react favorably toward other organisms to the extent that these organisms
are biologically related to the actor. The closer the relationship is, the
stronger the preferential behavior.
Why should parents sacrifice themselves for their children? Why do uncles employ nephews rather than strangers in their business? Why do inheritance laws provide for passing property on along lines of kinship? Why,
in short, do people, and indeed other animals as well, behave nepotistically.
To many, these questions appear so intuitively obvious as to require no
explanation. We favor kin because they are kin. This is no answer of course,
but a mere restatement of the problem. Besides, we do not always favor kin.
Profligate sons are sometimes disinherited, incompetent nephews not hired
and so on. Yet, on the whole we are nepotists, and when we are not, it is
for some good reason. Nepotism, we intuitively feel is the natural order of
things. Where we feel nepotism would interfere with efficiency, equity or
some other goals, we institute explicit safeguards against it and, even then,
we expect it to creep in again surrepticiously.
But why? A convincing answer was hinted at by the British biologists R.
A. Fisher (1958, first published in 1930) and J. B. S. Haldane (1932) but
elaborated on only about 15 years ago by W. D. Hamilton (1964) and J.
Maynard Smith (1964). The theorem of "altruism", "kin selection" or "inclusive fitness," as biologists often refer to nepotism, was increasingly discovered to be the keystone of animal sociality. Soon, a theoretical synthesis
of population genetics, ecosystem theory and ethology gave birth to the new
discipline of "sociobiology" as E. O. Wilson labeled it in his magisterial
compendium on animal behavior (1975, ably summarized in Barash, 1977).
The problem that posed itself to biologists was the seemingly self-sacrificial behavior of some animals under some conditions, e.g. the emission
of alarm calls to warn conspecifics, the mimicking of injuries to distract
predators, or seeming restraints on reproduction under adverse ecological
conditions. Wynne-Edwards (1962) answered the problem in terms of group
selection. Altruists behave in such a way for the good of their social group;
groups that produce altruists have a competitive advantage over those that
do not. However, there is one big drawback to the group selectionist argument. Altruism, by biological definition, is behavior that enhances the fitness (i.e. the reproductive success) of others at the cost of reducing the
fitness of the altruist. If the altruists do indeed reduce their fitness by behaving altruistically, then genes fostering altruism would be selected
against. How can an animal population sustain altruistic genes that reduce
the reproductive success of their carriers through enhanced predation, induced sterility (as in the worker castes of social insects) or some other cause?
The answer is so disarmingly simple and convincing that even WynneEdwards has recently recanted his group selectionist argument. Seeming
altruism is, in fact, the ultimate in genetic selfishness. Beneficent behavior
is the product of a simple fitness calculus (presumably an unconscious one
in most animals, though often a partially conscious one in humans) that
takes two factors into account: the cost-benefit ratio of the transaction be-

20
tween altruist and recipient, and the coefficient of relatedness r between
altruist and recipient. Simply put, an altruistic transaction can be expected
if, and only if, the cost-benefit ratio of the transaction is smaller than the
coefficient of relatedness between the two actors.
The coefficient of relatedness between any two organisms is the proportion of genes they share through common descent. It can range from a value
of one (for organisms that reproduce asexually, e.g. through cell division)
to zero (between unrelated organisms). In sexually reproducing organisms,
parents and offspring and full siblings share one-half of their genes; halfsiblings, grandparents and grandchildren, uncles-aunts and nephews-nieces
share one-fourth; first cousins, one-eighth, and so on.
Reproduction, in the last analysis, is passing on one's genes. This can be
done directly through one's own reproduction or indirectly through the
reproduction of related organisms. The fitness of an organism is, by definition, its reproductive success. The inclusive fitness of an organism is the
sum of its own reproductive success plus that of related organisms discounted for their coefficient of relatedness. Thus, it takes two children to
reproduce the genetic equivalent of ego; but the same effect can be achieved
through four nephews or eight first cousins.
As brilliantly argued by Richard Dawkins (1976), the ultimate unit of
replication is the gene, not the organism. Bodies are, in Dawkins' words,
mere mortal and expendable "survival machines" for potentially immortal
genes. Such genes, therefore, as predispose their carrying organisms to behave nepotistically will be selected for, because, by favoring nepotism, they
enhance their own replication. Nepotistic organisms foster the fitness of
relatives who have a high probability of carrying the same gene or genes for
nepotism. Nepotism genes, therefore, will spread faster than genes that program their carriers to care only for their own direct survival and reproduction—genes, for instance, that would program organisms to eat their siblings
when hungry. This phenomenon of fostering inclusive fitness through kin
selection or nepotism has been conclusively shown (mostly by studies of
social insects, but also, increasingly, of vertebrates) to be the basis of much
animal sociality (E. O. Wilson, 1975; Daly and Wilson, 1978).
Animal societies, from social insects to higher vertebrates, are held together primarily by cooperating kin who thereby enhance each other's fitness. This seeming "altruism" is thus the ultimate genie selfishness of
maximizing one's inclusive fitness. An individual will only behave "altruistically" (i.e. in such a way as to reduce its own direct fitness) if, by doing
so, the increment of fitness of a relative more than makes up for the loss to
ego. For instance, my full sister shares half of her genes with me; she must,
therefore, get more than twice as much out of my beneficent act to her than
what that act costs me. For a half-sister or a niece, who only shares onefourth of her genes with me, the benefit-cost ratio of the transaction would
have to be better than four to one—and so on, according to the coefficient
of relatedness between giver and receiver. The biological golden rule is
"give unto others as they are related unto you."

21
The applicability of the kin selection paradigm to humans has been hotly
debated. While anthropologists and other social scientists can hardly deny
that all known human societies are organized on the basis of kinship and
marriage, forming relatively stable reproductive units called families and
exhibiting preferential behavior toward relatives, a number of them continue
to argue nevertheless that kinship and marriage for humans are purely cultural concepts showing only fortuitous resemblance to anything biological
(Sahlins, 1976; Schneider, 1968). Elsewhere, I have attempted to refute that
line of argument. While man is in some important respects different from
other species, while man has an enormous capacity to adapt through learning
and while most of human behavior is indeed patterned (but not singlehandedly determined) by a culture transmitted through symbolic language,
man nevertheless remains an animal who shares many features of the mating
and reproductive system with that of other mammals (van den Berghe,
1979a; van den Berghe and Barash, 1977). Rapidly accumulating evidence
shows how applicable the kin selection paradigm is to humans (Chagnon
and Irons, 1979; Daly and Wilson, 1978; Greene, 1978; Hartung, 1976; Shepher, 1980).
Relatedness is a relative matter. Kinship might be schematized as a series
of concentric circles around ego, each circle representing a degree of relatedness (Schema I). In the smallest circles are small numbers of highly related
(r = Vi or lA) individuals. As the circles become larger, so does the number
of persons involved, but r becomes smaller ('/»», '/m, Vxi and so on), and
therefore the intensity of kin selection rapidly declines.
In theory, we could have a wide-open network of such overlapping egocentered kinship circles, with no particular clustering. At the limit, all of
humanity would consist of one vast undifferentiated surface of overlapping
concentric circles with no cluster or boundaries between them. This conSCHEMA I. Ego-centered map of kin selection.

22
dition would be produced by what population biologists call panmixia—that
is, random mating. Panmixia never happens in humans, nor in other animals,
for a very simple reason; if nothing else, space exerts a passive restraint on
who mates with whom. Sheer physical propinquity determines who has
sexual access to whom. Geographical barriers, such as mountain ranges,
bodies of water, deserts and the like, isolate animal populations from each
other, and create breeding boundaries between them, that can and often do
lead to speciation or subspeciation.
In humans, however, the story does not stop there. In addition to the
purely physical impediments of distance, topography and so on, human
groups create cultural prescriptions and proscriptions concerning their mating systems. There is not a single known human group that lacks them and
that even approximates panmixia. Rules specify whom one may, may not,
should or must marry. These rules and practices are almost invariably of
a twofold nature. Certain individuals or members of some kin groups (such
as lineages and class) cannot intermarry, while a wider group constitutes
the people who are normally expected to mate and marry.
Indeed, nearly all of the small-scale, stateless, human societies are groups
ranging from a couple of hundred to a few thousand people, defined almost
entirely by ties of descent and marriage. These breeding populations are
internally divided into smaller kin groups that swap daughters and sisters
for spouses between the men (Levi-Strauss, 1969). Elsewhere (van den
Berghe, 1979a), I have dealt at length with human kinship and marriage
systems and shown how closely they conform to the sociobiological paradigm. The relevance of all this to ethnicity is that the primeval model of
the human ethnic group is, in fact, the breeding population of a few hundred
individuals, the structure of which we have just sketched. This is what the
anthropologists used to call the "tribe"—a group characterized by internal
peace, preferential endogamy and common ancestry (real or putative).
At this point, I would like to introduce the neologism ethny for "ethnic
group." "Ethnic group" is clumsy and "tribe" has many different connotations—several pejorative. The French and Spanish cognates ethnie and
etnia are already in common usage, and it is time to start using such a
convenient term in English as well. The ideology usually referred to as
"ethnocentrism" might then be more parsimoniously called ethnism. An
ethny can be represented, as in Schema II, as a cluster of overlapping, egocentered, concentric kin circles, encompassed within an ethnic boundary.
The ethnic boundary is represented by a dotted line, since it is seldom
completely closed. More typically, there is some migration, principally of
women, among groups.
If the society in question has a rule of unilineal descent, either patrilineal
or matrilineal, then the ethny may also be represented, as in Schema III, as
internally divided into nonoverlapping unilineal descent groups (clans) that
exchange women. In fact, the vast majority of the stateless, tropical horticulturalists and pastoralists, and a considerable number of the preindustrial
state societies have unilineal descent and clan exogamy, often combined

23

Ethnic Boundary

SCHEMA II. Kinship map of the prototypical ethny.

with preferential cross-cousin marriage. This is not the place to expand on
the organizational advantages of this common system, as I have done so
elsewhere (van den Berghe, 1979a). Most of the remaining hunting and
gathering societies have bilateral descent and a much less structured system
of exchanging women but, even in these less structured systems, that were
presumably also characteristic of earlier phases of human social evolution,
the ethny is also a breeding population of limited size (typically a few
hundred), most of whose members are related to each other.
There are, of course, exceptions. Some women are captured from neighboring ethnies. Conquest and peaceful migration periodically mix populations, and newcomers may be fictiveiy related by adoption. It is very difficult
and quite exceptional, however, for an ethny to form if the core of the group

24

Ethnic Boundary
SCHEMA III. Clan exogamy in unilineal descent ethnies.

is not made up of people who know themselves to be related to each other
by a double network of ties of descent and marriage. Ethnicity is thus defined
in the last analysis by common descent. Descent by itself, however, would
leave the ethny unbounded, for, by going back enough, all living things are
related to each other. Ethnic boundaries are created socially by preferential
endogamy and physically by territoriality. Territoriality and endogamy are,
of course, mutually reinforcing for without physical propinquity people can
hardly meet and mate and, conversely, successful reproduction, with all the
lavish parental investment it requires for humans, favors territorialized kin
groups. The prototypical ethny is thus a descent group bounded socially by
inbreeding and spatially by territory.
Until the last few thousand years, such groups were of limited size as
witnessed by many surviving "primitive" societies. The natural ethny in
which hominids evolved for several thousand millenia probably did not
exceed a couple of hundred individuals at the most. Evidence for this is the

25
great mental and emotional strain on the human brain to " k n o w " more than
a few hundred individuals. We can recognize by sight many thousands, but
our ability to associate complex personalities with faces and to make reliable
enough predictions about people's behavior to render interaction sufficiently unstrained is quite limited. Urban life constantly strains these physiological limits, and when we must constantly interact with a larger and
rapidly changing cast of characters the very nature of the interaction changes
drastically, as has been repeatedly noted by social scientists and others.
There are many fundamental differences between what the German sociologists called Gemeinscha/t (the small-scale, intimate, face-to-face group
of a few hundred people or the prototypical ethny in my terms) and Gesellschaft (the large, anomic, impersonal society characteristic of the industrial age).
We have evolved, I am arguing, the kind of brain to deal with small-scale,
Gemeinscha/t-type groups, the prototype of which is the ethny, the "wegroup", the "in-group" of intimates who think of each other as an extended
family. Beyond that kind and size of group, the strain of having to deal with
people we do not know well enough, and therefore cannot trust, is of such
a nature as to alter radically the very nature of the interaction. In the larger
world, we expect ruthless self-interest and cheating to be rampant and to
be constrained principally by the coercive power of the state. Furthermore,
our brain, which in other respects is a stupefying complex instrument, rebels
at "knowing" intimately more than a few hundred people at the limit. If we
try to exceed an upper limit of, say, 500, we either have to slough off old
acquaintances to allow new ones, or we simply fake familiarity and conviviality beyond our emotional and intellectual capabilities.
The primordial ethny is thus an extended family: indeed, the ethny represents the outer limits of that inbred group of near or distant kinsmen
whom one knows as intimates and whom therefore one can trust. One intuitively expects fellow ethnics to behave at least somewhat benevolently
toward one because of kin selection, reinforced by reciprocity. The shared
genes predispose toward beneficence; the daily interdependence reinforces
that kin selection. Fellow ethnics are, in the deepest sense, "our people."
This prototype of the small, endogamous, kin-related ethny is, of course,
importantly modified in practice, especially in the larger societies that have
arisen since the development of agriculture some 10,000 years ago, of large
states some 5000 years ago, and most recently of the industrial revolution
200 years ago. So far, we have merely sketched the evolutionary scenario
of the ethny. Now we must fill in the picture by introducing the qualifications.
Ethnic endogamy is seldom strict and prescriptive. Generally, it is merely
preferential, and, most importantly, asymmetrical by sex. The double standard of sexual morality that is so apparent in many aspects of our behavior
and so readily understandable in terms of the biology of asymmetrical parental investment (Daly and Wilson, 1978; Trivers, 1972) is also glaringly
present in the application of ethnic endogamy. Much of the abundant lit-

26
erature on ethnicity and sex has been psychoanalytically oriented, invoking
elaborate theories of frustration-aggression, sado-masochism, repression of
libidinal urges and attraction of forbidden fruits (Adorno, 1950; Bastide,
1950; Freyre, 1964; Mannoni, 1964; Lillian Smith, 1963; Stember, 1976).
The sociobiological paradigm provides a much simpler explanation. In
nearly all species, the female is the scarce reproductive resource for the
male rather than vice-versa. There are fewer females available for insemination than males ready to inseminate. Eggs are big, few and therefore costly;
sperms are small, abundant and therefore cheap. Since females invest much
more in the reproductive process than males, they maximize their fitness
by being choosy about their mating partners. They seek to pick the best
possible mates in terms of genetic qualities and resources they have to offer.
The male, on the other hand, maximizes his fitness by being promiscuous
and by outcompeting his rivals in access to reproductive females.
Seen in that light, the ethny is a corporation of related men seeking to
enhance each others' fitness by retaining a monopoly of sexual access to
the women of their own group. This, however, does not preclude men from
further enhancing their reproductive success by making the most of every
opportunity to inseminate women from other groups. In fact, the whole
history of ethnic relations powerfully confirms this interpretation. Men jealously "protect" "their" women from men of other groups, deeply resenting
ethnic exogamy on the part of women, while at the same time seeking access
to women from other groups. In ethnically stratified societies, this double
standard takes the form of polygamy of the dominant-group men, with subordinate-group women becoming secondary wives and concubines. Where
several ethnies live side by side in an unstratified system, the groups constantly raid each other for women.
This sexual asymmetry of endogamy has, of course, one important consequence—namely that no ethny is a completely closed breeding system.
The circulation of women between ethnies continuously brings in fresh
blood. One may then look at ethnic relations from the point of view of the
circulation of women, and arrive at the following formulation. Within the
ethny, a group of related men peacebly exchange kinswomen for wives
among themselves. After the system has been in operation for several generations, the wives are also related to their husbands; frequently, they are
preferentially cousins, in fact. This leads to a certain degree of inbreeding
that is all the greater as the ethny is small.
Between ethnies, men use power and violence to secure access to women
from other groups, and this reduces the level of inbreeding. When the ethnies
in presence are equally matched, male competition for foreign women takes
the form of interethnic raids. After an ethnic hierarchy has been established,
subordinate-group men loose all or part of their control of "their" women
and their reproductive success is curtailed, while upper-group men are
polygynous and incorporate subordinate-group women. An ethnic hierarchy, therefore, generally results in a reduced fitness for subordinate-group
males. The classical scenario for conquest is to rape the women and kill,
castrate or enslave the men.

27
Asymmetry of reproductive strategies for males and females has another
important corollary for ethnic relations. In a situation of ethnic hierarchy,
ethnic solidarity between men and women is undermined. The men of the
subordinate group are always the losers and therefore have a reproductive
interest in overthrowing the system. The women of the subordinate group,
however, frequently have the option of being reproductively successful with
dominant-group males. Indeed, even where forced into relationships with
dominant males, they must cooperate in the interest of their children. We
shall return to that important point when we examine slavery systems.
Descent, 1 asserted, is the central feature of ethnicity. Yet, it is clear that,
in many cases, the common descent ascribed to an ethny is fictive. In fact,
in most cases, it is at least partly fictive. If such is the case, does not the
fictive or putative character of kinship invalidate the sociobiological argument presented here? I think not. Ethnicity, I suggested, is extended kinship. Even in restricted kinship, descent is sometimes a fiction. In most
societies, some children are adopted or are not the offspring of their supposed fathers. Nevertheless, these exceptions do not invalidate the general
proposition that human kinship systems reflect biological relatedness. Some
anthropologists have argued against this proposition (Sahlins, 1976; Schneider, 1968), but they must strain the data beyond credibility to defend their
position. A number of anthropologists have argued convincingly against the
purely cultural-determinist view of human kinship (Fortes, 1969; Fox, 1967).
In a recent book (van den Berghe, 1979a), I have attempted to demonstrate
how closely human systems of kinship and marriage fit expectations derived
from the sociobiological paradigm.
If kinship in the most restricted circle of the nuclear family is sometimes
a biological fiction, it is little wonder that the greatly extended kind of
kinship implicit in ethnicity should often be putative. The larger the ethny,
the more likely this is. Clearly, for 50 million Frenchmen or 100 million
Japanese, any common kinship that they may share is highly diluted, and
known to be so. Similarly, when 25 million Afro-Americans call each other
"brothers" and "sisters," they know that they are greatly extending the
meaning of these terms. The enormous ethnies, running into millions of
members, that characterize industrial societies are limiting cases, far removed from the evolutionary prototype of a few hundred people that we
have been talking about.
Yet—and this is what begs explanation—the fiction of kinship, even in
modern industrial societies, has to be sufficiently credible for ethnic solidarity to be effective. One cannot create an instant ethny by creating a myth.
The myth has to be rooted in historical reality to be accepted. Ethnicity can
be manipulated but not manufactured. Unless ethnicity is rooted in generations of shared historical experience, it cannot be created ex nihilo. Many
attempts to adopt universalistic criteria of ethnicity based on legal citizenship or acquisition of educational qualifications, for instance, failed. Such
was French assimilation policy in her colonies. No amount of proclamation
of Algerie frangaise made it so. Leopold Senghor, that masterful craftsman
of the French language, ended up extolling negritude (in French!) and be-

28
coming the president of independent Senegal. The Algerian pieds noirs were
reincorporated into the French ethny despite five or six generations of African experience, while Muslim Algerians with French citizenship find acceptance difficult even after two or more generations of residence in France.
Examples could be multiplied of nonacceptance, by industrial as well as
Third World societies, of groups perceived as being of different genetic
origin, despite their acquisition of dominant group culture and language;
Koreans in Japan, Afro-Americans in the United States, Jews in Europe,
overseas Chinese and East Indians in Asia, Africa and the Caribbean.
If myths of ethnicity must be credible, what tests of ethnicity are used to
decide on their credibility? What criteria do people use to decide whether
an individual is a fellow ethnic or not? In the small-scale societies typical
of our species until a few thousand years ago, the simple test of acquaintance
based on previous association sufficed in most circumstances. We share
with other higher vertebrates, such as dogs and monkeys, the ability to
recognize individuals and to carry faces in our memories for long periods
of time. Occasionally a person kidnapped by another group early in life
might face the problem of establishing his filiation with his group of origin,
but, in most cases, in societies of a few hundred people the test of membership is straightforward enough: the person belongs if he is known to
belong; he does not belong either if he is known not to belong or if he is not
known to belong.
Obviously, the larger the society gets, the more difficult the problem of
ascertaining membership becomes. Already in "primitive" societies that run
into tens of thousands, membership is no longer always established prima
facie; it must be proven. At that level the test is generally genealogical: the
unknown individual claims membership through filiation with known
members. Kinship, that is, is explicitly used to establish ethnicity. Australian aborigines are said to have been able to do so across the face of the
continent, but this is an extreme case. Usually, tracing filiation only works
in groups of moderate size (a few thousand) and spatial dispersal (a few
hundred square kilometers).
Where societies run into hundreds of thousands or even millions of members, and cover vast stretches of territory, the situation becomes complicated.
Ethnicity can no longer be so easily ascertained and, therefore, it can be
faked. If ethnism is a way of maximizing fitness through extended nepotism,
then a clever animal like man can be expected to fake common ethnicity
for gain. Con games in which individuals gain "undeserved" advantage by
exaggerating or counterfeiting a relationship to their victims thrive in largescale societies that lack the easy controls of recognition and intimacy found
in small societies. Ethnicity is one of these manipulable relationships. At
the same time, there are occasions where ethnicity has to be established
quickly, where one literally shoots first and asks questions later. How, then,
can one establish ethnicity quickly and reliably and also keep cheats under
control? What features will be chosen as ethnic markers?
There are many possibilities, tending to fall into three main categories of

29
traits. The three are not mutually exclusive, and their respective effectiveness varies greatly according to circumstances.
First, one can pick a genetically transmitted phenotype, such as skin
pigmentation, stature (as with the Tuzi of Rwanda and Burundi), hair texture, facial features or some such "racial" characteristic. Groups that are
socially defined by genetic phenotypes are called "races," and societies that
put emphasis on biological traits to differentiate groups within it can be
called "racist."
Second, one can rely on a man-made ethnic uniform. Members of one's
group are identified by bodily mutilations and/or adornments carried as
visible badges of group belonging. These markers range from clothing and
headgear to body painting, tatooing, circumcision, tooth filing and sundry
mutilations of the lips, nose and earlobes.
Third, the test can be behavioral. Ethnicity is determined by speech,
demeanor, manners, esoteric lore or some other proof of competence in a
behavioral repertoire characteristic of the group.
A brief review of the three classes of ethnic markers is useful at this point,
for each has a different set of properties and of structural consequences.
Race would seem the most obvious solution to the problem of ethnic recognition, especially if there is a biological basis for the extended nepotism
that we are discussing. Does it not stand to reason that genetically inheritable
phenotypes are the most reliable markers of ethnicity, if by ethnicity one
means, in the last analysis, genetic relatedness? Would not one, therefore,
expect racism to be universal? The answer to the first question, a theoretical
one, is "yes," and to the second, an empirical question, " n o . "
However, before proceeding, I must clarify a common confusion about
the term "race." The word has been used in several distinct meanings, inter
alia as a synonym for nation or ethny, (e.g. "the French race"), as a biological subspecies or inbred population (e.g. "the Chihuahua or Cocker
Spaniel race") and as a synonym for species (e.g. "the human race"). None
of these meanings is implied here. Where relatively inbred subgroups of the
human species are meant, we will speak of "populations" in the genetic
sense. What is meant by "race" here is a social label attributed to groups
of people in particular societies at particular times, on the basis of inherited
phenotypical characteristics. If phenotypic criteria are socially used to categorize groups (usually, if not always, invidiously), then races are said to
exist in that society, and the ideology supporting that classification and its
social consequences is called racism (van den Berghe, 1967).
It is also important to stress that phenotypes chosen for social relevance,
while often clearly visible markers of genetic origin, are typically biologically trivial in terms of fitness, abilities, aptitudes and temperament—indeed,
anything of social consequence. To suggest that the sociobiological theory
presented here is racist in the sense that I have just defined it is nonsensical.
Our theory says nothing about racial differences between h u m a n
groups—much less about any invidious ranking between them. On the contrary, it stresses a common biological propensity, not only of all humans,

30
but also of all social animals, to favor kin over nonkin, a propensity that
gets translated into ethnism and sometimes (but only sometimes) into racism.
Having said this, there is no denying that, even though humans share the
overwhelmingly greater part of their genetic material with each other (and
indeed with other closely related organisms such as the great apes), the
relatively small proportion of their gene loci that is multiallelic produces
a wide range of individual variation and a smaller, but not negligible,amount
of group variation. Human populations are strikingly different from each
other in the distribution of some genes, and at least some of these differences
have had adaptive significance during some periods of human evolution
under certain environmental conditions. For instance, tropical populations
of Africa and South India show a much higher incidence of the recessive
gene for sickle cell anemia, an allele that, though highly deleterious in
homozygous form, confers a measure of immunity to malaria to its heterozygous carriers.
Similarly, there is a close association between the distribution of a gene
causing lactose intolerance in adults and the presence or absence of cattle.
The lactose-intolerance gene is virtually absent from the gene pool of East
African pastoralists but common in other parts of Africa where the tse-tse
fly makes the raising of cattle nearly impossible. The several genes that
regulate the amount of melanin in the skin are also distributed in a way
that shows a close correspondence with climatic conditions. Through skin
pigmentation, the amount of absorption of sunlight is regulated: some is
needed because of the essential vitamin D, but too much is carcinogenic.
Therefore, there is a direct correlation between skin pigmentation and latitude, or at least there was until the mass migrations that accompanied
European slave trade and colonialism.
Some human groups are characterized by the significantly higher incidence of some deleterious genes for which no adaptive significance can be
found. Examples are the "Tay-Sachs syndrome," a form of genetic idiocy
found ten times more often among Askenazic Jews than among Gentiles and
Sephardic Jews, and the relatively high frequency of hemophilia (a sexlinked recessive gene on the X chromosome) among the descendants of
Queen Victoria, who in the early 20th century populated the royal houses
of Europe from Spain to Russia (Stine, 1977). Such phenomena are attributable to what geneticists call the "founder effect" (i.e. the effect of a prolific
ancestor) and the resultant "genetic drift" in the gene pool of his or her
descendants.
In these cases, however, the incidence of these harmful genes tends to be
low, even in the populations where it occurs most frequently. For instance,
one Askenazic Jew out of 25 is a carrier of the recessive Tay-Sachs gene,
compared to one in 400 among Gentiles. Genetic differences between populations are thus generally a matter of relative frequency of alleles, not of
absolute differences.

31
There is no denying the reality of genetic differences in frequencies of
alleles between human groups. None of these differences, however, has yet
been shown to bear any functional relationship with the social attribution
of racial characteristics in any human society nor with the relative positions
of dominance and subordination of racial groups in any society. There is
nothing, either in the study of human genetics or in sociobiological theory
to support any social order or ideology, to vindicate or challenge the position
of any group or to buttress or attack any ethical premise or philosophical
system. Human genetics and the presence or absence of racial distinctions
in human societies are two almost totally discrete orders of phenomena.
The only tenuous connection between them is that some human groups,
under conditions to be specified presently, sometimes use genetically transmitted phenotypes as badges of membership in social groups. The socially
ascribed significance of these genetic markers can be enormous, but it bears
no intrinsic relationship to their biological, evolutionary significance. Humans use phenotypic characteristics first and foremost as probabilistic markers of common descent.
Now, let us return to the problem of the presence or absence of racism
in human societies. With our contemporary knowledge of human genetics,
we categorically exclude parenthood on the basis of a single nonmatching
allele and, conversely, we can establish kinship beyond reasonable doubt
by matching individuals on a multiplicity of alleles of known frequency
distribution in certain populations. In practice, however, most people are
not geneticists and, indeed, until less than a century ago, people had only
the vaguest notions of how characteristics were inherited. The outcome is
that while in many, perhaps most, human societies, tests of physical resemblance are used to assess probability of kinship and, by extension, ethnicity,
these tests are seldom the only ones or even the main ones that are relied
upon, at least as far as establishing ethnic membership is concerned.
The reason for this seeming paradox is apparent enough. At the rudimentary level of folk genetics, racial phenotypes are often very poor indicators of group membership because neighboring populations typically
maintain a sufficient rate of migration to create genetic gradients such as
that intragroup variation on specific loci is much greater than intergroup
variation. In short, neighboring populations—the very ones that are concerned about maintaining and defending ethnic boundaries—typically look
very much like each other. Phenotype is useful to distinguish individuals
within groups but not to distinguish between groups. Let us take the example
of eye and hair color in Europe. There is a gradient from south to north of
increasing frequency of the recessive alleles for blue eyes and blond hair.
A Greek army fighting in Finland might make reasonably effective use of
these genetic traits as markers of ethnicity—but not in the far more likely
circumstance of having to fight Albanians or Turks. Similarly, skin color
might be used by a Moroccan army crossing the Sahara, but not between
Moroccans and Algerians, or Ghaneans and Togolese. The most crucial eth-

32
nic boundaries most of the time are those between groups competing for
scarce resources in the same general vicinity. Those are precisely the circumstances under which racial distinctions are most useless.
One can therefore expect racism to appear only where long-distance immigration has suddenly put in presence substantial numbers of people
whose physical appearance is different enough as to make genetic phenotype
a reliable basis for distinguishing between groups. People must migrate
across genetic gradients before their physical appearance can be used as a
reliable basis of inferring group membership. Under such unusual conditions, people often develop what Hoetinck (1967), in the Caribbean context,
has called a "somatic norm image," i.e. some mental picture of what members of their own and of other groups look like. Even then, however, miscegenation, which typically accompanies conquest and slavery, often blurs
racial distinctions within two or three generations. The migration must not
only be across large distances, but it must also be rapid and massive enough
to make race a useful marker of genetic relatedness between groups. Such
conditions have been exceptional in human history, until the colonial expansion of Europe in the past 500 years. If racism is to continue over several
generations, it must be buttressed by severe barriers against miscegenation,
a rare situation found in only a few countries such as South Africa and the
United States (van den Berghe, 1967).
For these reasons, racism, as the primary basis for group distinctions, has
been the exception rather than the rule. Racism is not a Western, much less
a capitalist, monopoly. For example, when the tall Hamitic Tuzi conquered
shorter Bantu speakers to the South, they invented their own brand of racism
(more specifically, "heightism") to buttress their domination of the Rwanda
and Burundi kingdoms (Maquet, 1961). But there, too, the reason was the
same as for the development of Western racism in the wake of European
colonial expansion: long-distance migration across a wide genetic gradient—in this case, in body stature. In short, racism can be expected to
develop and thrive where genetically inherited phenotypes are the easiest,
most visible and most reliable predictors of group membership. When phenotypes lose these properties through intermixture of groups, cultural criteria
typically supplant racial criteria of group membership. This happened, for
instance, throughout the Spanish American colonies that began as a racial
casta system (indeed, the word "caste" comes from the Spanish-Portuguese
term) and gradually evolved as societies stratified by class and ethnic criteria
and only minimally by phenotype (van den Berghe, 1967).
The theory presented here accounts better for the appearance and disappearance of racism in various times and places than competing theories
that attribute racism either to ideological factors [e.g. Tannenbaum (1947)
on the differences between Protestantism and Catholicism and their respective legal traditions in the Western Hemisphere) or to the capitalist
mode of production [e.g. numerous writers of Marxist disposition such as
Cox (1948) and Simons and Simons (1969)). More than anything else, it is
long-distance migration over genetic gradients that creates racism; con-

33
versely, miscegenation attenuates it. And miscegenation almost invariably
occurs because racism as such does little to inhibit it. Dominant-group men,
whether racist or not, are seldom reluctant to maximize their fitness with
subordinate-group women. It takes extraordinary measures of physical segregation, such as long existed in South Africa and the United States, to
preserve a racial caste system. Racism is the exception rather than the rule
in intergroup relations, and racially based systems are peculiarly conflictridden and unstable. Attempts at maintaining them often result in cataclysmic bloodshed [e.g. Leo Kuper's (1977) study of revolution in Algeria,
Zanzibar, Rwanda and Burundi; the Haitian revolution; and the mounting
crisis in Southern Africa]. I shall return to the special case of race later in
this book, especially when I deal with racial slavery systems.
Both the second and the third categories of cultural markers are manmade and cultural, but the second is visual and artifactual, while the third
is behavioral. The two types of marker are often used conjointly, as multiple
tests of ethnicity. If we turn first to what I have called the "ethnic uniform"
type of marker, it has the advantage of providing a visible and therefore
rapid clue of group membership. This is quite useful in combat or contest
situations, for example, as witnessed by the widespread use of uniforms by
armies, sport teams and the like. Then the premium is on easy, quick detection at a distance. A drawback of many of these easily visible clues
provided by headgear, clothing, plumage, body paint and the like, is that
they can be faked. A system of ethnic recognition based solely on these
would be widely open to cheating, and indeed cheating does occur as when
opposing armies try to infiltrate each other by donning their opponents'
uniforms. The sanctions against such cheating, incidentally, are often exceptionally severe, such as immediate execution when, normally, simple
capture would be expected.
Ethnic markers based on bodily mutilations, such as facial tatooes, tooth
filing, circumcision, nose, lip and ear piercing and the like are not easily
reversible, but they are often not so striking and can only be identified at
close quarters.
Finally, there are behavioral ethnic markers, which are among the most
reliable and hence commonly used. They have the advantage of being difficult to fake, because the performance criteria are often of considerable
subtlety and intricacy, but they require skill and time in being applied and
hence do not satisfy the criteria of ease and immediacy. Behavioral criteria
may include styles of body movement, gesturing, eating or greeting etiquette
and the like, but language holds pride of place among them. The way people
speak places them more accurately and reliably than almost any other behavioral trait. Language and dialect can be learned, of course, but the ability
to learn a foreign tongue without a detectable accent drops sharply around
puberty. Therefore speech quality is a reliable (and difficult to fake) test of
what group an individual has been raised in. Moreover, acquisition of foreign speech is extremely difficult except through prolonged contact with
native speakers, another safety feature of the linguistic test.

34
Although language is a relatively subtle test, certain easily detectable
phonemes give the foreigner away. A classical historical episode concerns
the massacre of French troops by Flemings in the city of Brugge (or Bruges
as the French say) in 1302. The Flemings wanted to kill the French army
of occupation in their beds without raising the alarm, so the problem was
how to identify Frenchmen quickly and reliably, in the dark, in order to
slaughter them without fuss. The solution was to make them repeat a short
Flemish phrase, "schilde en de vriend," ("shield and friend") that contained
phonemes unpronounceable to native speakers of French. History books tell
us that the stratagem was devastatingly successful. (As the son of a Flemish
Belgian father and a French mother, going to a French-medium Belgian
school in Brussels, I distinctly remember the disturbing ambivalence that
this gruesome bit of Belgian history left me with. It was by no means clear
to me on which side I was.)
Besides the difficult-to-fake properties of language that make it a good
test of ethnicity, language can also be used to transmit quickly, simple
esoteric information, such as passwords that are also easy tests of membership. In addition, language is a powerful vehicle for emotional communication. Not surprisingly, therefore, language is inextricably linked with
ethnicity. An ethny frequently defines itself, at least in part, as a speech
community; its particular speech is laden with emotional qualities and
valued much beyond its efficacy as a means of communication. Second
languages, or linguae francae adopted later in life for purposes of interethnic
communication, can convey complex messages accurately and can become
perfectly serviceable media for a wide range of practical purposes such as
trade, formal education, technology and so on. However, they are usually
bereft of the multiplicity of emotional connotations that are largely restricted
to one's "mother-tongue."
The first language learned in infancy is intimately associated with a whole
register of emotions first experienced with close kinsmen and, therefore,
these affective qualities of kinship become associated with language and
rub off onto other members of the speech community. The spontaneous joy
of hearing one's mother tongue spoken when surrounded by strangers is
probably a universal human experience. It is experienced even after a long
exile. One may become quite proficient in a foreign language yet still fail
to enjoy and experience it at the gut emotional level. People often report,
for instance, that they can only enjoy singing or poetry in their mothertongue. Language learning is the universal human experience of early childhood through which full human sociality is achieved, and through which
one becomes integrated in a kinship network. It is little wonder, therefore,
that language is the supreme test of ethnicity. Fellow ethnics are those
whose speech is sufficiently like one's own to allow for the unhindered
communication of the entire range of human emotions and messages. Other
languages are learned for the sake of instrumental convenience; the mother
tongue is spoken for the sheer joy of it. It is probably this fundamental
difference in the speaking of first versus second languages that, more than

35
any single factor, makes for the profound qualitative difference between
intraethnic and interethnic relations. The mother-tongue is the language of
kinship. Every other tongue is a mere convenience between strangers.
Let us summarize the argument so far. Humans, like other social animals,
are biologically selected to be nepotistic because, by favoring kin, they
maximize their inclusive fitness. Until the last few thousand years, hominids
interacted in relatively small groups of a few score to a couple of hundred
individuals who tended to mate with each other and, therefore, to form
rather tightly knit groups of close and distant kinsmen. Physical boundaries
of territory and social boundaries of inbreeding separated these small human
societies from each other. Within the group, there was a large measure of
peace and cooperation between kinsmen and in-laws (frequently both kinds
of relationship overlapped). Relations between groups were characterized
at best by mistrust and avoidance—but frequently by open conflict over
scarce resources. These solidary groups were, in fact, primordial ethnies.
Such was the evolutionary origin of ethnicity: an extended kin group.
With the progressive growth in the size of human societies, the boundaries
of the ethny became wider; the bonds of kinship were correspondingly
diluted, and indeed sometimes became fictive, and ethnicity became increasingly manipulated and perverted to other ends, including domination
and exploitation. The urge, however, to continue to define a collectivity
larger than the immediate circle of kinsmen on the basis of biological descent
continues to be present even in the most industrialized mass societies of
today. A wide variety of ethnic markers are used to define such collectivities
of descent, but their choice is not capricious. Those markers will be stressed
that are, in fact, objectively reliable predictors of common descent, given
the environment in which the discriminating group finds itself. Sometimes,
but rather rarely, race is the paramount criterion; more commonly, cultural

characteristics, especially language, do a much better job of defining ethnic

boundaries.
So far, we have suggested the raison d'etre of ethnicity—the reason for
its persistence and for its seeming imperviousness to rationality. Ethnic (and
racial) sentiments often seem irrational because they have an underlying
driving force of their own, which is ultimately the blunt, purposeless natural
selection of genes that are reproductively successful. Genes favoring nepotistic behavior have a selective advantage. It does not matter whether
their carrying organisms are aware of being nepotistic or even that they
consciously know their relatives. Organisms must only behave as if they
knew. It happens that, in humans, they often know in a conscious way,
though they are sometimes mistaken.
The phenomenon of ethnicity in humans, however, is not in principle
different from the phenomenon of boundary maintenance between animal
societies. Other animals maintain clear boundaries between themselves and
other species, most importantly barriers to matings between closely related
species that are the very mechanism making for speciation in the first instance (Mayr, 1963). But humans are not even unique in maintaining societal

36
boundaries within the species. Thousands of species of eusocial insects keep
different colonies of the same species quite distinct from each other, often
using pheromones (smell signals) to recognize each other (E. O. Wilson,
1971). Among mammals, man included, the boundaries between societies
are, on the whole much less rigid than among the eusocial insects but
nevertheless, societal boundaries between groups of conspecifics are clearly
marked and defended.
We conventionally restrict the meaning of ethnicity to humans, but we
would not be unduly extending the meaning of the term by applying it to
troops of macaques, prides of lions or packs of wolves. These other animal
societies too are held together by kin selection and must compete with other
societies of conspecifics for scarce resources (E. O. Wilson, 1975). In principle, the problems of boundary maintenance are the same for humans and
other animals, despite the vastly greater order of complexity of human societies.
Like many other species, man too lives in an environment that includes
other societies of his species. Interethnic relations, therefore, must be analyzed not only within the genetic context of kin selection but also, and
equally importantly, within an ecological context. This is the subject of the
next chapter.

SUGGESTED READINGS
The best layman's introductions to sociobiology are to be found in Barash (1977),
Daly and Wilson (1978) and Dawkins (1976), after which the reader can then approach
E. O. Wilson's (1975) meaty and masterly treatise. For human applications of sociobiology, see Chagnon and Irons (1979), Shepher (1981), and van den Berghe (1979a).

3
ETHNICITY AND
RESOURCE COMPETITION:

THE ECOLOGY OF TERRITORIALITY
AND SPECIALIZATION
So far, I have suggested a genetic underpinning for animal sociality in general, human sociality in particular, and most especially, the phenomena of
ethnism and racism. Ethnic solidarity is an extension of kin-based solidarity—that is, of nepotism. Merely to give an evolutionary explanation for
ethnic solidarity, however, says little about what is generally called ethnic
(and race) relations. To say that kin relation is the underlying biological
basis of ethnic solidarity allows only the grossest of predictions, because
social relationships take place, not in the abstract, but in an environment
in which organisms compete with each other for scarce resources. A multiplicity of circumstances dictate the actual content of relationships. The
general paradigm is that individual organisms behave, consciously or unconsciously, in such a way as to maximize their inclusive fitness. Degree
of biological relatedness is one of the two main terms predicting cooperation
or conflict. The other is the cost-benefit ratio of the transactions between
actors. Under some circumstances, it pays to cheat or even to kill your
brother, e.g. when he stands between you and an amount of resources (inheritance, throne) vast enough to make it worthwhile to forego the benefits
of nepotism. Conversely, circumstances can transform unrelated enemies
into allies.
The sociobiological model, therefore, does not predict that fellow ethnics
will always stick together, or that enmity and conflict will always prevail
between ethnies. Behavioral outcomes are always mediated through a vast
number of environmental variables. Human ecology is peculiarly complex
because, in addition to the physical and biotic (other plants and animals)
features of the human habitat that importantly influence human adaptive
behavior, humans have developed through culture an impressive capability
to modify both the physical and biotic habitat and the very forms of human
sociality itself.

38
Other organisms can also modify their habitat: corals form reefs; beavers
build dams; elephant herds can devastate forests or, conversely, carry seeds
long distances through their intestines and help regenerate the flora. But
man has no rivals in cultural ability to modify (and upset) environment
through technology. Other animals also have a limited ability to change
their social organization according to environmental fluctuations or phases
of their reproductive life cycle. Many birds, for example, form large, nonterritorial flocks at certain times, but separate into territorial breeding couples for reproductive purposes (E. O. Wilson, 1975). Male hoary marmots
can be either devoted fathers and faithfully monogamous mates or roving
philanderers, depending on environmental conditions (Barash, 1977). None,
however, have the flexibility with which man can modify behavior and
invent new forms of social organization in response to environmental
changes. Human culture (including, of course, technology) is thus an increasingly important part of the human environment. Indeed, culture can
be described as the man-made part of the human habitat.
HUMAN ECOLOGY AND ETHNIC COMPETITION
This is not the place to attempt a treatise on human ecology. [For recent
efforts in that direction, by an anthropologist and an economist respectively,
one should turn to Bennett (1976) and Boulding (1978).] The point is simply
that an understanding of human behavior must incorporate a synthesis of
biological ecosystem theory and of what anthropologists have called "cultural ecology." The implications of that view for ethnic relations is that the
latter, as a special category of human behavior, must also be seen in an
ecological context that includes two main sets of features: (1) a physical and
biotic habitat to which each ethny must adapt and (2) a sociocultural habitat
made up of competing ethnies.
Obviously, the distinction between these two sets of variables is analytic,
for, in practice, the two are intertwined. Much of the relations between
ethnies is shaped by the nature of the natural resources over which they
compete, and by the nature of the specific niche within shared habitats to
which specific ethnies have adapted. Nonetheless, there is a partly autonomous and man-made component to ethnic relations, especially relations
of dominance and subordination, that is not simply reducible to factors in
the physical and biotic environment.
Ethnic (and race) relations consist, in the last analysis, of competition
over scarce resources, which are ultimately convertible into fitness—that
is, reproductive success. Resource competition for humans is more complex
than for other species because it includes not only the natural resources of
space, food, shelter and so on, but also man-made resources (wealth, prestige
and power) that are also convertible into reproduction. The ultimate scarce
resource for competing males in the fitness game is, of course, reproductive
females. There are always fewer of them around than there are males—ready
and willing to inseminate them. Although the males of many species com-

39
pete individually for females (either by direct dominance contests between
males or through attracting discriminating females, or both), human males
also organize themselves as groups to capture or attract each others' females.
Thus, the capture, defense and seduction of women often plays as salient
a role in intergroup relations, as it does between the individual members
of the same ethny.

THE REGULATION OF COMPETITION
There are basically three mechanisms whereby animals reduce or regulate
resource competition: (1) specialization, (2) territoriality and (3) hierarchy.
The first operates principally between species. It is well known that two
closely related species are seldom sympatric (i.e. share a habitat) unless
they adapt to different specialized niches and thus minimize direct competition. Otherwise, one species displaces the other in more or less short
order. Thus, several predator species such as lions, leopards and cheetahs
can coexist if they specialize on different size preys, or if some are diurnal
and others nocturnal. Several primate species share the same habitat if some
are terrestrial and others arboreal, or, if all arboreal, if some are fruit-eaters
and others leaf-eaters.
The other two mechanisms regulating competition—territoriality and hierarchy—operate mainly within species. Hierarchy or dominance establishes an order of access to resources and typically inequality of access as
well. Territoriality divides the habitat into patches monopolistically exploited by individual animals or small breeding groups. Humans make extensive and complex use of both territoriality and hierarchy, in regulating
resource competition (van den Berghe, 1974). Indeed, as population density
increased and, with it, the range of resources used and the intensity of their
exploitation, human territoriality and hierarchy assumed increasingly elaborate and complex forms. Humans are especially striking in the degree to
which they establish not only individual hierarchies within groups, as do
countless other species, but also group hierarchies. This ability, as we shall
see in Chapter 4, has far-reaching consequences for the development of
ethnic relations.
In addition to territoriality and hierarchy, humans have also developed
group specialization, so that different sympatric ethnies have adapted to
different ecological niches. Many animals have a division of labor by age
and sex classes, as do humans as well, and among the eusocial insects
different "castes" are almost always sterile (E. O. Wilson, 1971; Oster and
Wilson, 1978). In human societies, the division of labor, both within and
among societies is carried well beyond anything found in other animals. It
is especially unusual in the animal kingdom to have reproductive groups
of the same species live sympatrically and symbiotically on the basis of
group specialization. Such a situation has developed repeatedly between
different ethnies in the last few thousand years (Hechter, 1978). Much of
ethnic relations represents niche specialization between ethnies that are

40
thus in much the same ecological relationship to each other as symbionts
of different species in the rest of the animal kingdom. Indeed, members of
different ethnies often treat each other and regard each other as if they did
indeed belong to different species. Treating each other as
prey—cannibalism—is but a widespread illustration of this human capacity
to draw a sharp line between in-group and out-group, and to create pseudospecific lines between ethnies. Racist ideologies are another example.

STAGES OF ETHNIC RELATIONS
In the remainder of this chapter, I shall examine the ecology of ethnic
relations principally from the point of view of territoriality and specialization, reserving hierarchy for the next chapter. If we take these three properties of human groups together, we can see that they fall into a logical and
evolutionary progression of types of ethnic relations. One always hesitates
to label stages of evolution or types of situations, for categories of any kind
are often interpreted too statically and too rigidly. I want to stress, therefore,
that the four stages that I am about to introduce shade off into one another.
They are merely introduced to suggest gross periods in an evolutionary
progression—spans on a continuum of increasing complexity and interdependence. The purpose of these rough stages is to organize the data, and to
highlight key ecological features that structure ethnic relations. The general
historical trend is from the first to the fourth stage, but different systems
and subsystems can simultaneously exist at different stages of evolution. It
should also be stressed that I am speaking here of an overwhelmingly cultural, not genetic, evolution that has taken place in the last ten thousand
years or so since the domestication of plants and animals.
With all these caveats, I would like to suggest the following four stages
of ethnic relations: (1) autarchy, (2) trade, (3) symbiosis and (4) parasitism.
Schema I gives a capsule summary of what is meant by these terms.* Before
proceeding to describe them more extensively and then to illustrate them
through ethnographic data, however, these stages must be put in the context
of both empirical reality and intellectual approaches thereto.
At one end of the intellectual spectrum are those macrotheorists who look
at the world through a telescope, and who deal with large modern states
and world market systems. From the perspective of "world system" theorists
*The schema bears some resemblance to the three types of ecological interdependence suggested
by Fredrik Barth (1969. pp. 19-20); indoed, it elaborates on it, reverses the logical sequence of
Barth's first two types and subdivides Barth's third type into our stages three and four by adding
the dimension of hierarchy that is curiously underplayed in Barth and indeed in much of the
anthropological literature. It is as if anthropologists, having been associated with the colonial
enterprise, feel guilty about power relationships and would wish them away. When Barth deals
with hierarchical ethnic relations (1969. p. 27). he invokes value consensus rather than coercion
as the basis of the stratified multiethnic systems: "|the ethnic groups| share certain general value
orientations and scales, on the basis of which they can arrive at judgements of hierarchy." Thus
hierarchy, and indeed ethnic affiliation itself, becomes a matter of subjective definition rather
than a descriptive outcome of who gets what in a context of ecological competition.

41
Stage

Characteristics

Type of Relationship

Autarchy

Unspecialized
Territorially discrete
Unhierarchical

Mutual avoidance
or chronic raiding

Trade

Specialized
Territorially discrete
Unhierarchical

Trade and barter

Symbiosis

Specialized
Territorially overlapping
Unhierarchical

Niche specialization
and ecological
interdependence

Parasitism

Specialized
Territorially overlapping
Hierarchical

Economic exploitation
and political domination

SCHEMA I. Stages of ethnic relations.

(Chirot, 1977; Wallerstein, 1974), the modern world looks like a reasonably
well-integrated system in which all parts are interdependent, and in which
all ethnies are directly or indirectly incorporated in centralized states and
are thus in the fourth stage of our schema. From their Olympian perspective,
world system theorists are, grosso modo, right.
At the opposite end of the intellectual spectrum is what I like to call, with
apologies to Raymond Firth (1936), the Tikopia view of the world through
a microscope, as a multitude of pristine, insular, isolated ethnies, the
"tribes" of traditional anthropology. There have always been a number of
laudable exceptions to this antiquarian, ahistorical tradition in anthropology, especially in Southern Africa (Gluckman, 1958; Hilda Kuper, 1947a,
1947b; Monica Wilson, 1936), in the Chicago school of American anthropology (Redfield, 1956; Tax, 1952), in the Mexican school of anthropology
(Aguirre Beltran, 1957, 1967), and among French Africanists (Balandier,
1963). Nevertheless, the main thrust of ethnography until the last two decades has been to treat ethnies as self-contained isolates long after they had

42
ceased to be, to attempt to recapture their pristine condition before Western
conquest and to downplay ethnic relations, even between neighboring indigenous groups. From the Tikopia perspective, all ethnies are treated as
if they were still in the first of our stages.
The real world is, of course, neither an archipelago of isolated ethnies nor
a vast, smoothly integrated system. Different systems and subsystems within
larger wholes are differently integrated, and have thus substantially different
types of ethnic relations. Neighboring ethnies of the Papua-New Guinea
highlands, for instance, whose main form of interaction until recently consisted of killing and eating each other (Berndt, 1962), still have rather different ethnic relations than the Flemings and Walloons of industrial Belgium
(du Roy, 1968). There are, to be sure, commonalities and I am not passing
any value judgment as to which is better, but Belgian ethnic relations are
characterized by a far greater level of complexity and interdependence.

Autarchy: The Yanomano and the Maori
Now, let us return to our schema. At the first level of autarchy, we have
ethnies that are unspecialized, territorially distinct from each other, and not
ordered into a hierarchy of dominance and subordination. This was the
prototypical situation before the rise of states and the domestication of
plants and animals. Self-sufficient groups lived side by side, in contiguous
but separate patches of habitat, which they exploited with similar technologies and with similar effect. Each ethny was a close replica of its neighbors;
little surplus was produced, and there was little of value to exchange. Therefore, there was little incentive to enter into cooperative relationships between groups, other than for military alliances. Groups directly competed
with each; interdependence was minimal and so therefore were ethnic relations. The latter consisted mostly of mutual avoidance, clashes over natural resources, especially the control of territory and what went with it, and
raids for woman and livestock.
Except for greater efficiency of hunting and foraging conferred by greater
intelligence and the technology that went with it, the ecosystems of preagricultural human societies were not fundamentally different from those
of nonhuman primate troops or social carnivores, like lions, wolves and
African hunting dogs. The hallmarks of ethnic relations were conflict and
avoidance between competitors for scarce resources.
Few contemporary human societies still fit the model of primordial autarchy; even the few remaining hunters and gatherers have, by now, virtually
all entered second- or third-stage relationships with neighboring pastoralists
or agriculturalists. Such is the case, for instance, of the much-studied San
Bushmen of the Kalahari and Bambuti Pygmies of the Zaire rain forest (Lee
and De Vore, 1968, 1976; Turnbull, 1961, 1965). However, if one chooses
to ignore their incorporation into colonial or postcolonial societies, some
of the more isolated ethnies of Melanesia, the Amazon and Africa still had,
until one or two generations ago, relations approximating those of stage one.

43
They lived in contiguous but discrete territories; they were largely selfsufficient; and, therefore, they had little to offer to each other except more
of what they already had—principally land, women and livestock.
The Yanomamo. Some remote ethnies of the Amazon and Orinoco basins
in South America, for instance, still escape control from the governments
of Brazil, Venezuela, Peru, Bolivia and Ecuador, and continue to live in a
state of autarchy and to wage war with each other. Such are the Yanomamo
of Venezuela and Brazil, swidden horticulturists who live in stateless, classless societies where the village (of size 50 to 200) is the basic peace group
(Chagnon, 1974, 1977). Villages are made up of sections of two or more
patrilineages that exchange women between them.
Among villages, there is frequent raiding, mostly over—and for—women.
Food is relatively abundant and the population has recently been increasing,
probably due to the introduction of metal axes which facilitates jungle clearing for horticulture. Women are the scarcest resource, a shortage exacerbated
by some female infanticide and by polygyny. Successful older men often
have two or more wives. Men therefore fiercely compete with each other
for reproductive access to women. This leads to numerous disputes both
within and between villages, and these disputes frequently erupt into viol-

ence. Violence is carefully graded, from individual stick duels to war raids

between villages with several fatalities, but, within villages, violence usually

doAes not escalate beyond a general melee where only nonlethal blows with

the blunt ends of weapons are exchanged. Sometimes, however, villages
split over these conflicts, forming new villages that can then start raiding

each other.

War is the principal relationship between villages. The most valued trade
goods, principally metal tools, are obtained from the outside since the Yanomamo have no indigenous metal-working technology. Wives are normally
close relatives (cross-cousins) who belong to one of the other patrilineages
in the village and such other women as can be captured from neighboring
villages during war raids. Each village has its own fields and produces much
the same crops: plantains, sweet bananas, manioc, taro, sweet potatoes, palm
trees and maize. There is little of value to trade among Yanomamo groups
since they are all adapted for the same niche of forest horticulture, supplemented by hunting, fishing and the collecting of wild plants, and since the
more desirable trade goods are produced by none of them.
The Maori. The Maori of New Zealand before European contact in 1769
lived largely in an autarchic situation (Buck, 1962; Firth, 1959; Vayda, 1960).
They were Polynesian horticulturalists who immigrated in several waves
from the North, starting a thousand or more years ago, and settled on the
two main islands of New Zealand, in a heavily forested, mountainous, rainy,
temperate environment—very different from the tropical setting of Polynesia. They had a stone-age technology, albeit a sophisticated one, and their
economy was based mostly on horticulture (mostly tubers), hunting (mostly

44
of rats and birds), fishing along the coast and the collecting of forest products
(especially fern roots). The dog was the only domestic animal, though the
rat probably came along as a stowaway on the cross-oceanic journeys and
became a valuable source of animal protein. The pig, abundant in Polynesia,
was not introduced into New Zealand until European times. Thus, there
was an absence of large livestock and a chronic shortage of animal protein.
The main tools, stone adzes and axes, imposed severe limitations on the
exploitation of a heavily forested environment. Huge trees were killed by
fire, but the clearing of land for horticulture was a slow and tedious process,
making arable land a scarce commodity. Substantial ecological differences
between the warmer Northern Island and the colder Southern Island made
horticulture more extensive and successful in the North.
The basic organizing principle of Maori social organization was patrilineal
descent, giving rise to what anthropologists call a segmentary lineage system. Other lines of descent were recognized but, for purposes of social
organization (such as the transmission of property and authority and the
organization of labor and war) the male line of descent and the lineages and
clans formed by patrilineal descent, took precedence over other consanguineal ties.
The rule of residence was virilocal, that is, women, at marriage, came in
to live with their husband and his kinsmen. Villages, consisting of a few
hundred people, were made up of localized segments of patrilineages—one
descent group usually forming the core of the village. This segmentary structure of patrilineages gave rise to basically a three-tiered social organization
(Vayda, 1960). The whanau was an extended virilocal family, a three- or
four-generation group of up to a score or so of people, made up of a man,
his wife or wives, his married sons and their wives and children, his unmarried daughters, and perhaps his junior brothers and their wives and
children. Next, was the hapu, a larger patrilineage group made up of several
related whanau. The hapu was usually coterminous with the village community, although some villages were made up of several hapus, and, sometimes, a hapu occupied several small villages. At the highest level of social
organization was the iwi, or clan, made up of any number of related hapu.
It is estimated that the 100,000 to 300,000 Maoris who inhabited New Zealand before European contact were split into about 40 iwi. The iwi was thus
a group of several thousand people.
The related hapu, which together formed an iwi, occupied contiguous
lands, so that the iwi was a territorial as well as a geneological unit. However,
social organization at the iwi level was so loose that one hesitates to call
it an ethny. It was the hapu—the village community—that best corresponded
to the concept of ethny as I have defined it. The hapu was the group of a
few hundred people who lived and worked together, owned and used communal property such as land and large war canoes, went to war as a raiding
party, and intermarried. Village endogamy was not strict, and there were
some marriages between hapu, but marriage within the hapu was considered
desirable and was in fact frequent. The hapu, in short, was the peace group

45
(there was never organized hostility within the hapu), the endogamous
group, the main territorial unit, the largest effective political group, the
prototypical ethny. The iwi, by comparison, was but a loose superethny.
Maori political organization was quite loose and uncentralized. The Maori
were, in fact, a stateless society wherein the main principle of authority was
seniority in the male line. The so-called "chiefs" were not executive officers
with the power to rule over unrelated people. They were merely the respected eldest members of patrilineages, exercising jural authority over kinsmen and their wives. Rank and leadership went by primogeniture, but as
members of a hapu considered themselves to be all descendants of a common
ancestor, "chiefs" and "commoners" were relatives to each other. Certain
senior branches of patrilineages, however, regarded themselves as of chiefly
rank and were termed rangatira, as distinguished from their commoner
kinsmen who were called tutua (Buck, 1962).
In addition, there was a third stratum of slaves: war captives became
slaves, a degraded, disfranchised status. Slaves were not necessarily illtreated. Female slaves often bore children for their masters, and their descendants became assimilated into the captor group. However, slaves could
also be killed and eaten at the whim of their masters, and they lost all claim
to social position, even in their group of origin who regarded them as dead
because of the stigma of slavery. Until European conquest, slaves probably
accounted for less than 10% of the population, as most war captives were
killed and eaten shortly after capture. Thus, the Maori, although they still
clearly lacked states, had at least the rudiments of social stratification and
what might be termed incipient chieftaincy.
What was the nature of ethnic relations among the Maori? That is, what
relations did the hapu have with each other? Apart from occasional intermarriages and friendly visiting with gift exchanges, hapu ethnic relations
were mostly of the aversive type: they waged war with and ate each other
in competition over scarce resources, principally land. Although some goods
and services were exchanged between hapu, and although there was some
limited use of slave labor, members of different hapu regarded each other
as actual or potential enemies or, indeed, food, for cannibalism was rampant.
Such limited exchanges of goods as took place did not qualify as trade
or barter, for they had a distinctly ceremonial rather than commercial character. People did not consciously trade with each other, exchanging commodities according to agreed upon prices or standards of value. Instead, as
Firth (1959, Chapter 12) very clearly states, communities exchanged gifts,
especially prized luxury goods such as obsidian, greenstone and bird feathers, and frequently in conjunction with the visits of chiefs. Even when items
of direct practical value, such as food, were exchanged, the transaction took
the form of gift and countergift rather than barter. According to Firth (1959,
pp. 409-410), "Barter implies some agreement as to the rates of exchange,
a practice quite foreign to the Maori mode of conducting matters . . . no
bargaining or haggling of any kind took place." If a guest expressed admiration for an object, etiquette called for his host giving him the item. Firth

46
cites an example (pp. 411-412) of a man who became abusive in his demands
and was killed by his reluctant hosts: "One is almost entitled to conclude
from this that in old Maori days true politeness demanded that one should
slay a man sooner than hurt his feelings by refusing him a request."
This leaves war as the principal basis of Maori ethnic relations. The Maori
have a particularly fierce reputation because they resisted European penetration with considerable vigor, and because the increasing introduction of
European firearms starting in the late 18th century led to a frightful escalation in the scope and devastation of interethnic conflicts. Yet, it is clear
that the new weaponry merely intensified a well-established pattern. While
traditional Maori weaponry was largely limited to wooden and stone spears
and clubs of various styles and lengths, wars were nevertheless fought in
earnest, with extensive killing of men, women and children, with occasional
extermination of entire groups. Hapu waged regular expeditions against
each other, involving 100 to 400 warriors on each side; their villages were
fortified armed camps that were regularly besieged to the point of starvation
(Vayda, 1960). Insults [e.g. quoted by Buck (1962, p. 401): "Who are you?
The flesh of your ancestor is still sticking between my teeth.") were often
a pretext for war, but war was clearly a real contest to eliminate competitors
for scarce resources (game and fish) and to obtain territory, plunder, women,
slaves and human meat. Vayda (1960) interprets Maori warfare ecologically
in terms of shortage of land in an environment where stone-age technology
made land clearing slow, difficult and tedious.
There is evidence of restraint in fighting or, at least, in the slaughter of
women and children, between hapu containing close relatives on both sides,
and it was common for individuals to change hapu before the battle if the
opposing hapu had closer relatives than the one to which he belonged
(Vayda, 1960, p. 28). Thus, considerations of inclusive fitness clearly entered
warfare. Between insulated hapu, warfare was deadly serious and over tangible stakes; though accompanied by a lot of ritual, it was over spoils and
resources. Even cannibalism, often described by anthropologists in religious
and ritual terms, was practical. It was largely restricted to fighting men and
to what is technically called "exocannibalism" (eating people of outside
groups), but it was consciously thought of as the most convenient solution
to the logistical problem of feeding the troops in the field. Slain enemies
of all ages and both sexes were often eaten on the spot. Surplus meat was
carried in baskets by war prisoners, who, as the supply dwindled, were
themselves in constant danger of being slaughtered and eaten. Even slaves
of long-standing were often killed and eaten (Vayda, 1960, pp. 67-72). In
fact, humans were the only large land animals that constituted a regular part
of the Maori male diet.
Contacts with Europeans completely disrupted Maori society. Externally,
the Maori become increasingly sucked into the larger colonial world dominated by European states, in which they became but one of a multitude of
conquered peoples. But even before they were conquered and incorporated

47
into the British colonial empire, trade contact with Europeans brought firearms and, with it, a frightful escalation of slaughter. To avoid extermination,
you had to secure muskets; muskets had to be traded with Europeans; but
the Maoris had little to trade, except for tatooed human trophy heads, which
became a sought-after curiousity, and for flax, produced by slave labor.
Trophy heads and slaves, in turn, could be gotten through war for which
you needed firearms. The infernal cycle was inescapable, and so was the
destruction of a whole way of life and the transformation of the Maori from
autarchic microsocieties to a conquered minority in a neo-European state.
Trade: Bambuti and Bantu
When two or more ethnies retain their territorial distinctiveness and their
political independence, but adapt to different ecological niches, a more
complex, cooperative and sustained type of ethnic relations develops, based
on an exchange of goods and services through trade, barter or employment.
Many systems of ethnic relations, even in complex industrial societies, have
features of this second stage of interaction. For example, the "guest workers"
who temporarily emigrate from the circum-Mediterranean area to work in
the industrial countries of northwestern Europe, who send part of their
wages back home and who eventually return home, partake of a system of
ethnic relations where the ethnies remain territorially distinct and politically independent, but where a division of labor and specialization creates
peripheral contact and economic interdependence. To the extent that the
"guest workers" cease to be temporary sojourners, as some of them almost
invariably do, their ethnic situation shades off into one of subordinate immigrant groups in a hierarchical society. Indeed, simpler types of ethnic
contact can easily be transformed by disparities of power and wealth into
hierarchical relationships. Once more, these stages or types of ethnic contact
must not be used in a rigid mechanical way, but merely as convenient
analytical constructs.
Another type of ethnic situation of the second stage common throughout
the world today, and one which deserves more attention than it has so far
received, is tourism. Exoticism becomes a marketable resource: "authenticity," or a reasonable facsimile thereof, is the ultimate commodity. In exchange for putting himself on show, the native receives material considerations:
a shilling for a photo, a dollar for a song or a peso for a dive. If necessary,
the exoticism is carefully cultured and stage-managed to satisfy tourist demand. The situation is clearly a transient one; the tourist is, by definition,
a short-timer with a tenuous, peripheral and indeed very special status. He
is at once a privileged guest and a ridiculed, unknowledgeable outsider; a
pampered recipient of mercenary deference and an impersonally exploited
resource. The very type of ethnic contact created by tourism militates against
that ultimate goal of the tourist experience: authenticity. But, when the
tourist is tired of being given that very special treatment reserved for his

48
breed, he goes home and becomes a native again. Each ethny is a resource
for the other, simply by being different. Each specializes in being itself, in
cultivating its uniqueness for the amusement of the other.
Naturally, differences in power and in wealth, which so often exist between tourist and "touree," typically make for a strong element of hierarchy
in the relationship. Besides tourism is a very special and recent case of
trade, made possible on a mass scale only through industrial affluence.
(When wealthy and nosy eccentrics like Alexander von Humboldt were few,
their travels in search of the exotic were called "explorations," rather than
"tourism.")
Let us turn to a less recent and less special example of trade—that of
Bambuti-Bantu relations in the Ituri rain forest of northeastern Zaire (Turnbull, 1961, 1965). The Bambuti are a group of so-called "Pygmies" who live
side by side with, but separately from, neighboring Bantu groups of so-called
"Negroids." In describing their relations, we shall again ignore the fact that,
for the better part of a century, both groups have become incorporated, albeit
peripherally, in a centralized state, the former Belgian Congo and now the
Republic of Zaire. Both of these political entities exerted a measure of control, especially on the Bantu whom they forced to pay taxes and cultivate
cash crops such as cotton. They also "opened u p " the area by building roads
and thereby brought in missionaries, traders, administrators and, of course,
a variety of trade goods. Again, these external influences were felt much
more strongly by the Bantu than by the Bambuti who could easily withdraw
into the forest and literally blend into the landscape. Here, however, we
shall deal with Bambuti-Bantu relations without reference to the colonial
and post-colonial political structure.
Bambuti and Bantu in the Ituri region speak mutually understandable
dialects of the same language; that is, the Bambuti have adopted a Bantu
language and have none of their own. Other than that, however, they are
about as different from each other as any two people on the African continent. Phenotypically, the Bambuti are about 20 centimeters shorter, on the
average, than the Bantu. The Bambuti's occupation of Central Africa antedates the Bantu's by many thousand years, and the present "Pygmy" population of Africa, scattered from the Cameroon to Rwanda, constitutes, along
with the Xhoisan ("Bushmen" and "Hottentots") peoples of southern Africa,
the remnants of a once much more widespread aboriginal population. By
comparison, the Bantu are recent interlopers.
The most striking cultural difference between the two groups is that the
Bambuti are seminomadic hunters and gatherers living in small temporary
camps (they move every few weeks), while the Bantu are tropical horticulturalists settled in much larger and more permanent villages (village sites
are changed every few years). The extent of their territorial distinctiveness
can be argued since both groups occupy the same general region, keeping
largely apart within it. The Bantu villagers concentrate along main roads,
rivers and paths, and are much more open to the outside world. Locally,
however, they stay close to their settled villages and neighboring fields,

49
cleared from the forest by the "slash-and-burn" technique. They are afraid
of the forest and avoid it. By contrast, the primeval rain forest is the
Bambuti's world and now their refuge. Bantu and Bambuti meet on the
Bantu's ground, that is, in the Bantu villages, but they keep separate most
of the time and, hence, cannot be considered to be strictly sympatric.
In terms of social organization the two groups are also strikingly different.
Other than age and sex differences that are universal in humans, the Bambuti
are a truly egalitarian, classless, stateless society. They have no chiefs, no
slaves, no policemen, no courts, no prisons, no taxes and no institutionalized
rank differences between adult men, other than individual prestige achieved
by age and personal qualities. Such loose authority structure as exists is
based almost entirely on kinship, sex, seniority and personal ascendancy.
The division of labor is limited to age and sex distinctions, and even these
are rather loose; men are dominant over women and more prominent in
decision-making, but male dominance is relatively gentle and muted.
Bambuti live in loosely structured bands of shifting composition, made
up of a handful to a dozen or so nuclear families (man, wife and their
children). They have a bilateral descent, that is, they recognize kinship in
all lines and thus have no larger lineages or clans based on unilineal descent.
Nuclear family groups commonly shift from one band to another in response
to ecological or social conditions, and the band is thus a residential, not a
kinship unit. That is, because of the open nature of the bands, a person is
likely to have close kinsmen in several bands, and kin ties are thus diffused
over large territories. The band is a semitemporary collection of nuclear
families who share an encampment and exploit the natural resources of the
territory around it.
Marriage rules are also flexible. Marriage may take place within the band
or between bands. Within bands, young people simply start cohabiting after
the young man has passed the initiation into manhood and brought his
prospective father-in-law some meat, and separation is rare after the birth
of a child. Marriages between bands are slightly more formal and involve
both groups, since the norm is that if a woman leaves a band, her band
should receive one in return from the recipient band. There is no bridewealth, but, between bands, men tend to exchange sisters or other close
female relatives. The wife usually joins her husband's band, but not necessarily, nor does the couple necessarily stay in the same band all of their
married life. Band composition responds flexibly to ecological pressures.
Polygyny is permitted, and some older men have two or occasionally three
wives, but most (90% or more) men are monogamously married.
In terms of mode of production, the Bambuti are still pure hunters and
gatherers. The women do most of the gathering and contribute the bulk of
the caloric intake in the diet. They also build the huts, weave baskets and
cook the food. The men do most of the hunting and contribute most of the
protein food. In addition, they organize festivals, make bark cloth and collect
honey from wild bees. Different Bambuti groups use two different hunting
techniques. Some hunt primarily with bows and poisoned arrows, also using

50
spears to kill larger animals. Their hunting is strictly a male activity. Others
beat game into long semicircular nets; in those groups, women and children
serve as beaters and men kill the animals entangled in the nets.
Being seminomadic, the Bambuti have to travel light and can accumulate
few possessions, other than the weapons of men, the few cooking pots and
baskets of women and a few items of personal clothing (mostly bark loincloths) and adornment. The system of production allows no storage of surplus; food collected is consumed within days. Differences of wealth cannot
arise, and therefore the very concept of wealth is alien to Bambuti thinking.
Resources are exploited and consumed communally at the band level.
The Bambuti are among the few "peaceful" human groups. In recent times,
they have not waged war, either between Bambuti bands or with their Bantu
neighbors, and they seldom resort to violence in the settlement of disputes
either within or between bands. Conflicts and arguments are settled by
public discussion, compromise and social pressure—primarily ridicule and
witchcraft. Each band has its hunting and foraging territory, and territorial
disputes are relatively rare.
Several complementary explanations help to account for this unusually
idyllic state of affairs. First, the colonial administration imposed, by superior
force, a Pax belgica on both Bantu and Bambuti. "Intertribal warfare" was
suppressed by the Force Publique, the Belgian colonial army. Second, between Bantu and Bambuti, a mutually beneficial relationship exists, as we
shall see, that would be destroyed by violence. The two do not directly
compete with each other, as each is specialized for completely different
niches. Third, the Bambuti, being much less numerous and less cohesively
organized than the Bantu, find it prudent not to antagonize them. Fourth,
the Bantu would find the Bambuti elusive and hardly worth the effort to
attack since they possess little of value that cannot be obtained by peaceful
trade. Fifth, while Bambuti bands do compete with each other, forest resources are abundant, and therefore the competition is not severe. Sixth,
since families frequently change bands and since individuals commonly
marry outside their own band, neighboring bands are linked by numerous
ties of kinship and marriage, so that the peace group, and indeed the ethny
are the Bambuti as a whole, not the individual band.
By contrast to the Bambuti, the Bantu horticulturalists have a much more
complex, highly structured social organization. They emphasize patrilineal
descent and form virilocal extended families; they recognize lineages and
clans, formed by the descendants of common male ancestors. The authority
structure, based on male seniority within these patrilineal kin groups, is
much more extensive than among the Bambuti, since the kin groups themselves are much larger. In addition, the Bantu have village chiefs, backed
up by police authority—thus the rudiments of a state organization, although
they are not clearly stratified into social classes. The lineages and clans are
exogamous. Marriage is accompanied by the payment of bridewealth by the
kinsmen of the groom to the kin group of the bride and thus involves two
extended patrilineal kin groups. Residence is strictly virilocal. Polygyny is

51

desirable, more common than among the Bambuti, and more clearly associated with wealth and power.
The Bantu system of production, based on tropical "slash-and-burn" horticulture, produces an abundance of carbohydrates (bananas, manioc, peanuts, rice, corn and beans). Animal protein is supplied by domesticated
livestock, mostly goats and poultry. Food is stored in granaries and livestock
is a form of capital accumulation; thus, surplus production is possible,
giving rise to differences of wealth which are in turn converted into political
power and polygyny.
This more intensive system of production is made possible by a fairly
advanced metal technology. Iron working spread among the Bantu of central
Africa several centuries before European contact, and the use of iron in both
tools and weapons has long been extensive. The combination of iron technology, horticulture and livestock raising makes possible a population density at least 20 times higher than the hunting and gathering of the Bambuti.
Bantu villages are cohesive and stable aggregations of hundreds of people—much larger than any of the Bambuti bands.
What modus vivendi have these two groups established between them?
Depending on whether one looks at it from a Bantu or a Bambuti perspective,
the picture is somewhat different. (Turnbull, by the way, distinctly looks
at ethnic relations from a Bambuti point of view, perhaps more than the
reality of the situation warrants.) The Bantu look at the Bambuti (whom
they regard almost as a different and inferior species of doubtful humanity)
with a kind of amused condescension, tinged with some fear because of
their association with the forest. To the Bantu, the forest and all creatures
associated with it, Bambuti included, represent danger, nature and savagery,
and are safely avoided. At the same time, the Bantu find the Bambuti entertaining dwarfs and establish with them patron-client relationships.
Indeed, the Bantu refer to particular Bambuti individuals and bands as
"theirs," in a proprietary sense. Whole Bantu villages see themselves as
collective "owners" of specific Bambuti bands, considering the relationship
as hereditary. In addition, individual Bantu patrons are linked to individual
Bambuti clients. In the Bantu's mind, there is no question as to who is
whose superior.
The Bambuti, for their part, see themselves as free to come and go as they
please, and as in no sense dependent on, much less "owned" by, the Bantu.
Far from regarding themselves as exploited by the Bantu, the Bambuti think
of the relationship as one beneficial to themselves, in which they trick the
Bantu into giving them desirable things that are not, strictly speaking, necessary, though they make life much easier and more pleasant. The Bambuti
thus see their association with the Bantu as optional, since they can always
withdraw into the self-sufficiency of the forest, merely by foregoing the
luxuries of the Bantu villages. So, at any rate, Turnbull (1965) tells us,
although he may somewhat idealize the Bambuti's situation.
Bambuti bands or individuals periodically drift in and out of the Bantu
villages that regard them as "theirs" and enter with their Bantu patrons into

52
multifaceted interactions that include barter, labor, intermarriage, ritual
functions and entertainment. In terms of barter, the Bambuti bring two
principal forest products much in demand among the Bantu: game and
honey from wild bees. In exchange they receive mostly starchy foods, such
as bananas and manioc (which saves them hours of tedious collecting in
the forest, but are not at all essential to their diet). The exchanges do not
stop at these basic staples, however. The Bambuti also receive from the
Bantu a range of luxuries and conveniences, including all iron objects (principally arrow- and spearheads that greatly increase the efficiency of Bambuti
hunting), pottery (the Bambuti have no potters), tobacco (a prized luxury),
salt (another scarce and highly desired commodity) and matches (the Bambuti have no fire-making technology, and must therefore keep their fires
burning and transport embers from camp to camp)—not to mention other
commodities acquired by the Bantu through long-distance trade.
In addition to meat and honey, the Bambuti offer the Bantu their labor
and occasionally a woman who usually becomes a junior wife of a Bantu.
(Bantu women never marry Bambuti, and the unidirectionality of interbreeding clearly indicates some measure of Bambuti subordination to the
Bantu. The Bambuti as a group are woman-losers, and thus their fitness is
correspondingly reduced.) Turnbull describes the labor which the Bambuti
furnish as desultory, unreliable and intermittent, and the Bantu regard the
Bambuti as lazy (much as Belgian colonials regarded all Congolese, incidentally). For a few hours of lackadaisical work in the fields, in house
construction or in manioc pounding, the Bambuti receive loads of starchy
food and a few trinkets. Clearly, their labor is not essential to the village
economy nor is the village food to the Bambuti. Both sides regard the transaction as a convenience more than as a necessity.
Perhaps one of the main intangible benefits that the Bambuti bring to the
Bantu, and vice versa, is amusement. The Bantu regard the Bambuti as
childish pranksters, good dancers and musicians, and entertainers. (In this
too, their stereotypes of Bambuti closely resemble the racism of the Europeans toward all Congolese during the colonial era.) The Bambuti are, therefore, called upon to participate in Bantu festivals and are even incorporated
into Bantu rites of passage, such as initiation and marriage. The Bambuti,
for their part, also find the Bantu villagers amusing, pretend to play their
games, act clownishly and delight in tricking them into favorable transactions. The Bambuti regard their sojourn in the Bantu village as something
of a lark, a pleasant break from ordinary forest life, during which they are
fed in exchange for a little work and clowning. In addition, they get some
useful trade goods from it—otherwise unobtainable. When they tire of the
game, they simply leave for the forest, until the fancy strikes them again.
For the Bantu, too, the Bambuti are an amusing change of pace, a kind of
travelling circus of dwarfs, who, in addition to being entertaining, bring
meat and do a little desultory work around the house and fields.
Such a picture of ethnic relations, as is drawn by Turnbull (1965), is, I

53
suspect, somewhat idealized, for, underlying the good-humored bonhommie
of the interaction, there is clear evidence of inequality, racism and paternalism. Indeed, Bantu-Bambuti relations seem like a buffoonish reenactment of a classical colonial relationship. What saves the Bambuti from the
fate of becoming a conquered people is that they have so far managed to
retain a large measure of economic self-sufficiency and that their forest
habitat affords them a refuge. How much longer is problematic. Changes in
the environment, such as opening the forest to logging operations could
drastically alter the relationship, almost certainly to the Bambuti's detriment. In other parts of central Africa, such as Rwanda, Pygmy groups, such
as the Batwa, have indeed become incorporated as low-status groups into
states dominated by Bantu or Hamitic conquerors, such as the Watuzi. The
Bambuti way of life is doomed. Hunters and gatherers today constitute
perhaps 0.02% of Africa's population. While it lasted, however, it was a
reasonably good way of life.
S y m b i o s i s : T h e Pastoral F u l a n i a n d their A g r i c u l t u r a l N e i g h b o r s
Full symbiosis, i.e. an ecological system in which two or more ethnies
occupy the same habitat but adapt to different ecological niches and develop
peaceful, mutually beneficial relations without the establishment of a hierarchy between them, is an exceptional situation. Very commonly, one
group conquers the other and establishes itself as a ruling class over them
in a multiethnic state. A fair approximation to a nonhierarchical symbiosis,
however, is achieved by the pastoral Fulani (also called Fulbe, Bororo or
Peul) and their horticultural neighbors in a vast stretch of the West African
Sudan and Sahel regions from Gambia to the Cameroon (Buchanan, 1953;
Michael G. Smith, 1960; Stenning, 1959, 1960, 1965). Once more, we shall
ignore the fact that since the turn of the 20th century, the whole of West
Africa became incorporated in the colonial empires of Britain and France
and thus the Fulani were one conquered people among many.
The Fulani number some seven million people, about half of whom are
concentrated in Northern Nigeria where they share the savannah with the
Hausa, Kanuri and many other sedentary groups of horticulturalists. It does
some violence to historical facts to describe the relations between the Fulani
and their neighbors as nonhierarchical, since the Western Sudan has been
characterized by a succession of highly complex, large, multiethnic states
for at least 1500 years before the colonial era. The empires of Ghana, Songhai,
Mali, Kanem-Bornu and Sokoto, to name but a few of the larger ones, all
included Fulani nomads, along with scores of other ethnies (Oliver and
Fage, 1962). The most important of these states for the Fulani of northern
Nigeria are the Hausa emirates conquered in a Muslim Jihad (Holy War) by
the Fulani under Usman dan Fodio in the first decade of the 19th century.
Some of the Fulani settled in the Hausa cities they conquered, intermarried
with the Hausa and became the ruling aristocracy of a vast feudal empire

54
under the Sultan of Sokoto. After a few generations, the town Fulani became
physically and culturally almost indistinguishable from their Hausa subjects.
However, the pastoral Fulani, who concern us here, retain a distinct identity and mode of life, despite the fact that they are also conscious of their
historical links with the town Fulani. The pastoral Fulani, who, like their
town relatives, are Muslims and consider themselves as members of the
same ethny, are the poor country cousins of the Fulani ruling aristocracy.
They do not share their political power, but they are accorded higher status
than the Hausa and other subjects of the town Fulani. Unlike the town
Fulani aristocrats who, through polygyny with Hausa women, look physically like the more "Negroid" Hausa, the pastoral Fulani are phenotypically
quite distinct from their neighbors: their skin color is a much lighter copper
brown, and their facial features are more "Hamitic" than "Negroid." The
pastoral Fulani stress these physical features, especially their lighter skin
and aquiline noses, as a means of asserting their superiority over outsiders.
One of their proverbs states, "See the nose, understand the character" (Stenning, 1965, p. 369).
The Fulani, like most other African pastoralists, have a classical patrilineal organization. The basic social groups are clans, lineages and subiineages, formed by descendance from common male ancestors. Residence
is virilocal, and the smallest local groups are in fact extended families
corresponding to segments of patrilineages. The size of the local groups is
dictated by ecological considerations. During the rainy season when pasture
is abundant and conditions permit greater concentrations of man and beast,
whole clans or major sections of patrilineages may form into large dispersed
encampments. In less favorable circumstances, the local group may consist
of only about 20 related extended families. Extreme drought forces even
greater dispersal of individual extended families.
Since the Fulani have been Muslims for centuries—indeed have produced
many puritanical religious reformers who turned successful conquerors after
launching Holy Wars—marriage customs reflect Islamic law. Polygyny is
frequent and desired, and first marriages tend to be endogamous within the
patrilineage. When the bride stays within the patrilineage, no bridewealth
is paid. The preferred spouse for a young man is his father's brother's daughter or his father's father's brother's son's daughter. Subsequent marriages
are often outside the lineage, including cousins through female lines, nonrelatives, non-Fulani and slaves.
Inheritance of both property and authority follows clearly the patrilineal
principle. A man's heirs are his sons, his brothers, his brother's sons, his
father's brothers and his male cousins in the male line—in that order. The
main form of property for pastoralists is, of course, livestock, mostly cattle,
but also sheep, goats and horses. Livestock ownership permits capital accumulation and thus sizeable difference in wealth between families.
The pastoral Fulani are a relatively egalitarian society, compared to their
sedentary neighbors. They are stratified mostly by seniority and sex, but

55
traditionally they had slaves, and, in addition to being more or less loosely
incorporated into larger states, two types of leaders play a political role in
community affairs. The ardo is the more traditional leader, a kind of community spokesman, mediator of disputes, presider over consensus and middleman in dealing with outsiders. The laamiido is more of a chief with
executive functions, but he is a more recent creation of the British colonial
administration, entrusted with tax collection, registration and other "dirty
work" of the larger government. Traditionally, the pastoral Fulani formed
very loose groupings based on patrilineal kinship, and they had no state of
their own and no well-defined social classes other than Fulani freemen and
foreign slaves.
Virtually the whole existence of the pastoral Fulani revolves around livestock, especially cattle. It provides the basis of the diet, either directly
through meat and milk or indirectly through trading milk and beasts for
grain and other crops produced by the sedentary agriculturalists. Each family
group has its herd made up of sheep and goats, but above all cattle: a stock
bull, milking cows, heifers, calves and pack oxen. The Fulani are strictly
nomads. Their cattle keep them continuously on the move. They set up
flimsy temporary camps, but have no place they can call home, no territory
they own, no concept of ownership of space. They are always on someone
else's land.
Strict ecological conditions dictate the Fulani's moves. Their lives are a
perpetual search for pasture and water for their livestock and their annual
migrations are fine-tuned to the cycle of rainy and dry seasons. Precipitation
determines not only the availability of pasture but, just as importantly, the
distribution of the tse-tse fly. Along with the anopheles mosquito (the vector
of malaria), the tse-tse fly (carrier of sleeping sickness) is one of the great
scourges of Africa. Cattle cannot survive in tse-tse-infected country, which
is also the wetter country, but cattle also need grass, and grass needs water.
The trick consists of staying one jump ahead of the tse-tse fly, which, like
green pastures, extends its range with the onset of the annual rains. The
Fulani maximize the use of that narrow niche, moving northward to drier
lands closer to the Sahara during the rainy season, and again southward
toward the denser savannah when the tse-tse fly retreats during the dry
season. The whole operation requires a multiplicity of risky guesses based
on the best available intelligence and experience of weather and local conditions, but also of social conditions imposed by the sedentary land users.
Survival for the pastoral Fulani thus requires not only fine tuning to local
ecology but also good ethnic relations. The latter are based partly on trade.
The Fulani frequent towns and markets where they acquire grain, metal
goods and numerous other goods produced by their sedentary neighbors in
exchange for milk and livestock. Milk is sold by Fulani women who carry
it on their heads in large calabashes and sell it in towns and villages, doorto-door or on public marketplaces. Live animals are sold by men, often to
Hausa merchants who transport and resell the beasts to butchers, several
hundred miles to the south, in the tse-tse infested forest belt where the cattle

56
can only survive a couple of weeks but where there is a brisk demand for
meat.
In addition to trading with their sedentary neighbors, the pastoral Fulani
must also negotiate their access to pasture and water during their annual
cycles of transhumance through other peoples' land. This involves a lot of
diplomacy and careful control of animals, so that no damage is done to
crops. Cattle are allowed over fallow land (and, as tropical agriculture requires long fallows, much land is under fallow in any given year), or over
land which has just been harvested and when it can feed on maize and other
cereal stubble. In exchange, the dung left behind provides the agriculturalists
with fertilizer. With careful management and good manners, everybody is
happy.
CONCLUSIONS
Two main conclusions can be drawn from these brief accounts of systems
of ethnic relations that stop short of full integration into multiethnic states.
One is that these systems very easily tip over to the fourth stage where one
of the ethnies asserts its political dominance and starts exploiting the others,
transforming symbiosis into parasitism. In fact, nearly all contemporary
systems of ethnic relations are of this kind, to which I shall turn in the next
chapter and devote much of the rest of this book.
The other conclusion is that ethnicity is not always an all-or-none concept.
Ethnic boundaries are not always sharply drawn, although they can be,
especially if they correspond to phenotypical differences. Commonly, however, ethnicity is a matter of degree of relatedness. People typically form
both alliances and cleavages, and grade the violence and destructiveness
they inflict on each other on the basis of their real or perceived degree of
relatedness. That is, both cooperation and conflict in human societies follow
a calculus of inclusive fitness, which, in man, is often at least partly conscious, but which need not be conscious to be operative.
Since relatedness is a matter of degree, it is frequently the case that different levels of ethnicity may be activated by conflicts, depending on the
relatedness of the main parties to the conflict and on the groups of kinsmen
which each side can muster. This phenomenon has been closely studied by
Chagnon among the Yanomamo (Chagnon, 1977; Chagnon and Bugos, 1979)
and has been noted in other societies as well. For example, this was clearly
the case in the ethnic politics at the Nigerian university I studied (van den
Berghe, 1973a). If the contenders to an academic post were, say, Ibo and
Yoruba, then political alignments would tend to follow these large ethnic
cleavages. If, however, the competitors were both Yoruba but from different
regions, then major ethnic subdivisions of the Yoruba would align against
each other—and so on down to the level of the local town and the lineage
group and subgroups.
This multitiered system of ethnic competition produces a system of fission
and fusion analogous, indeed homologous, to the ones described by an-

57
thropologists in their discussion of segmentary lineage systems (Evans-Pritchard, 1940). By now, this should not surprise us, since we have seen that
ethnicity is, in fact, an extension of kinship.
We have also seen how kinship and marriage ties between parties to a
dispute inhibits violence or, at least, restrains its destructiveness. This was
the case in Maori warfare as previously noted; Chagnon (1977) reports the
same for the Yanomamo; Evans-Pritchard (1940) notes that the Nuer do not
kill women and children in wars between different Nuer clans but kill them
when fighting the Dinka. To use an example closer to home, there was a
blatant difference in the level of ferociousness of American soldiers in the
Pacific and European theaters during World War II. According to American
notions of racism, the Germans were misguided relatives (however distant),
while the "Japs" or the "Nips" were an entirely different breed of inscrutable, treacherous, "little yellow bastards." This was reflected in differential
behavior in such things as the taking (versus killing) of prisoners, the rhetoric
of war propaganda (President Roosevelt in his wartime speeches repeatedly
referred to his enemies as "the Nazis, the Fascists, and the Japanese"), the
internment in "relocation camps" of American citizens of Japanese extraction, and in the use of atomic weapons. It is doubtful that atomic bombs
would have been dropped over, say, Stuttgart or Dortmund, but hardly a
whisper of protest was heard about Hiroshima and Nagasaki.
SUGGESTED READINGS
There are a number of general statements on human ecology by sociologists (Hawley.
1950). economists (Boulding. 1978). anthropologists (Steward. 1977) and others, hut
none is specifically focused upon ethnic relations. Several monographs and collections of articles, however, deal extensively with the ecological dimensions of ethnic
relations: such are Aguirre Beltran (1979). Fredrik Barth (1909). Collier (1975). Shahrani (1979) and van den Berghe and Primov (1977).

4
ETHNICITY AND COERCION:
THE POLITICS OF HIERARCHY

In the previous chapter, 1 surveyed the first three stages of interethnic relations based on the regulation of competition for scarce resources by means
of territoriality and specialization. I now turn to the most complex, fourth
stage, where coercion and hierarchy begin to play a salient role in ethnic
relations. For all practical, contemporaneous purposes, the entire world is
now in stage four and, therefore, I shall devote a disproportionate amount
of space to it. Indeed, much of the remainder of this book will deal with it.
DOMINANCE AND COERCION IN ANIMAL SOCIETIES
Coercion and its resulting hierarchies are not unique to humans. Many social
animals establish what ethologists call "hierarchies," "dominance orders"
or, in birds, "pecking orders." There is considerable discussion among students of animal behavior about the nature of hierarchy (E. O. Wilson, 1975).
Some animals establish linear hierarchies; others do not. In some species,
there are separate male and female hierarchies; in others, the order of dominance varies depending on the resource competed for; in others yet, an
animal's condition (e.g. oestrus and lactation) changes its relative position.
There is much disagreement on how best to measure hierarchy, or on
whether hierarchy is a unidimensional concept. Many ethologists measure
hierarchy, indeed define hierarchy, as order of access to resources, especially
food or, for males, receptive females; yet others focus on rituals of submission and dominance (which, among many primates, frequently take pseudosexual forms such as mounting or presenting the genitalia); some stress
"displacement behavior" (i.e. the yielding space to an approaching animal);
some insist that, among primates, "attention structure" (who pays attention
to whom) is crucial (Altmann, 1962; Chance, 1967; Chance and Jolly, 1970;
E. O. Wilson, 1975, Chapter 13).

59
Underlying all these interesting disagreements, differences of emphasis
and fine points of methodology and measurement, however, students of
animal behavior broadly agree that dominance or hierarchy is a concept
abstracted from the observation of animals competing for access to resources.
In the last analysis, what defines the hierarchy of a group is an order of
access to resources. The master paradigm explaining how resources are
distributed in a social group is, again, maximization of individual inclusive
fitness. The strongest do not always get all; in fact, they seldom do. Animals
predisposed to eat their helpless young, for instance, would not reproduce
successfully! Yet there clearly is an important element of coercion, or the
threat thereof, in the establishment, maintenance and challenge of hierarchies. Outside of the context of kin selection (especially parental care) and
reciprocity (especially between mated reproductive adults) animals maximize their fitness by outcompeting others for resources, directly or indirectly. Speed and deceit play a role in that contest, but coercion, i.e. the
use of force or the threat thereof, is the main method by which dominance
is exerted, maintained and indeed challenged.
Indeed, it is safe to generalize that there is no hierarchy without underlying coercion. Coercion is the use of force or its threat to increase the fitness
of the dominant animal at the expense of subordinate ones. The more or
less stable result of their multiple contests over resources is what we call
the dominance order of a group of social animals.

H U M A N D O M I N A N C E S Y S T E M S : COERCION A N D DECEIT
Complex as dominance is among nonhuman animals, it is nothing compared
to what hierarchy has become in the human societies of the last few millenia.
Human hierarchies are vastly more complex than anything found in other
species because of the following:
1. Humans form not only individual dominance hierarchies, as do other
animals, but also establish group hierarchies. So far, nothing beyond
small, unstable coalitions of two or three individuals has been found in
the more intelligent nonhuman mammals such as baboons. Only human
societies are organized on the basis of stable group hierarchies and, even
in our species, this is a relatively recent development of the last few
millenia.
2. Humans have the capacity to magnify, indeed to reverse, through an
increasingly lethal technology of violence, biological inequalities of
strength or intelligence between individuals. Biological differences of
strength based on age and sex still explain human dominance orders
within small groups, such as families or gangs, but human group-based
hierarchies are explainable almost entirely in terms of social organization
of the technology of violence. Socially oppressed groups are not necessarily made up of weaker or dumber individuals. Indeed, typically they
are not. Instead, they are composed of individuals who owe their inferior

60
position to technological and/or organizational inferiority in using the
means of violence.
3. The human capacity for conscious deceit (through ideology, inter alia)
further enhances our species' capacity for group inequality beyond anything known in other species. Human systems of group inequality, especially the ones perpetuated by all large, centralized states, are almost
invariably bolstered by an ideology that disguises the parasitism of the
ruling class as either kin selection or reciprocity. Subjects are told that
they are ruled (i.e. exploited) in their own best interests, either by a
benevolent despot who claims some kind of fatherly interest in them and
who supposedly saves them from their own greed and ineptitude, or
through a supposedly freely entered social contract wherein the rulers
are held to be chosen representatives and servants of the people entrusted
with promoting the common good and arbitrating and regulating individual conflicts of interest.
The first type of ideology used to legitimize the status quo—paternalism—is
the most common one in preindustrial societies. It has been repeatedly
reinvented in countless monarchies of Europe, Asia and Africa, in defense
of colonialism and chattel slavery in the Americas and Africa—indeed almost everywhere powerful agrarian states developed. The second and more
recent justification for tyranny and exploitation—often misnamed "democracy," either of the liberal or of the socialist "people's" variety—is characteristic of industrial societies since the French Revolution.
This is not the place to trace the development and analyze the operation
of complex systems of group coercion and exploitation in human societies,
as that would take us too far afield. I shall largely confine my remarks to
tracing the relationship of group coercion to ethnic relations. Nevertheless
a few preliminary observations are in order:
1. Group stratification is a relatively recent phenomenon in human evolution; it accompanied the so-called Neolithic Revolution, that is, the
domestication of plants and animals that greatly increased human population density, led to sedentarization into more permanent settlements
and made possible the accumulation (and, hence, the appropriation) of
surplus production.
2. Group stratification co-evolved with the state. The essence of the state
is intraspecific—indeed, intrasocietal parasitism. The state is the coercive apparatus used by the few to exploit the many. The state is, in fact,
the ruling class organized to extract surplus production through the use
of deceit or violence or the threat thereof. By parasitizing the exploited
classes through control of labor and its products (forced labor, slavery,
taxation), members of the parasitic class convert, in effect, organized
coercion into higher fitness for themselves at the expense of the exploited. Plunder and predation between human societies existed long
before the rise of states. With the emergence of the state, however, parasitism was extended within societies.

61
3. Ideology will be treated as a form of organized, collective deceit whereby
parasitism is disguised—usually as either kin selection or reciprocity.
To say that ideology reflects class interests is not to say that it is unimportant. Some forms of deceit are successful—successful, that is, in
terms of consequences for fitness—and are therefore important.
The reader will readily see that the above formulations on the nature of
the state, stratification and ideology, while formulated within the general
paradigm of maximization of individual inclusive fitness, is fully congruent
with Marxist class analysis and, indeed, owes a great deal to it.
ETHNICITY AND THE STATE
Innumerable authors have stressed the fundamental distinction between
nation-states and multinational states (Connor, 1978; Deutsch, 1966; Deutsch,
and Foltz, 1963; Emerson, 1960; Francis, 1976; Geertz, 1967b; Leo Kuper
and Michael G. Smith, 1969; Michael G. Smith, 1965a; Schermerhorn, 1970;
Young, 1976; Zubaida, 1970, 1978). Certainly many of the key words used
by social scientists in the analysis of domestic and "international" politics
rely implicitly or explicitly on that distinction: state, nation, nation-state,
nationality, nationalism, subnationalism, communalism, internationalism,
tribe, tribalism, ethnicity, colonialism, imperialism, plural society, multiethnic state, multinational state, ethnic nationalism and so on. Yet the
literature on these subjects is so hopelessly muddied by inconsistent and,
indeed, blatantly conflicting usages of these terms that the urge to create
neologisms is almost irresistible. In an effort to clarify the muddle without
introducing new terms, I shall set forth a few straightforward definitions.
A state is a collectivity headed by a group of people who exercise power
over others (who are neither kinsmen nor spouses), in order to extract
surplus production for their own individual and collective benefit.
A nation is a politically conscious ethny, that is, an ethny that claims the
right to statehood by virtue of being an ethny. Such a ideology is called
nationalism.
A nation-state is a state made up almost exclusively of a single nation.
A multinational state is a state made up of two or more nations.
A multiethnic state is a state made up of two or more ethnies that do not
claim statehood.
Imperialism is the domination of one or more ethnies over others.
Colonialism is long-distance imperialism, usually over noncontiguous
territory and over culturally unrelated ethnies.
These simple definitions may not solve all problems, but at least they
eliminate much of the needless confusion that arose from such careless
usage as calling multinational states like Nigeria, Zaire or India "nation-

62
states." If "nation-state" is to be used synonymously with "state," then the
term is superfluous. Similarly, "ethnic nationalism," by our definition, is
a redundancy. Terms like "tribe" and "tribalism" become altogether superfluous since they really mean "nation" and "nationalism" and are used
mostly invidiously to refer to Africans. (Why should the Hausa or the Zulu
be tribes, but not Danes or French Canadians?)
Now let us return to the distinction between state and nation. Why is it
important? At the outset, it is obvious that the two are far from being coterminous, despite the pious fictions of international conferences where
delegates pretend that all states are "United Nations." We know better, of
course. Only about 10% of the "United Nations' " 150-odd states are genuine
nations or at least come close to it by the criterion of having 90% or more
of their population speaking mutually understandable dialects of the same
language. The remaining 90% are multinational or multiethnic states, some
of which may still hope to become nation-states, but many of which do not
even try or have long since given up the attempt.
Conversely, many nations are divided between several states and may
thus be called multistatal nations: Kurds, Armenians, Germans, Basques,
Koreans, Yorubas and Ewes, to mention but a few examples on three continents. The extent to which these multistatal nations are nationalist and
irredentist varies enormously—both from place to place and cyclically. Nationalist movements are volatile and highly responsive to historical opportunities such as wars, revolutions and the breakdown of imperial systems.
One thing is clear: the real nation-state is a rare entity. But, rare though
it is, it seems to be seductively attractive as a basis of political organization.
Much bloodshed has accompanied the efforts to create nation-states. In
every age since the recorded history of states, nationalism has inspired
masses of people to veritable orgies of emotion and violence. Nationalist
conflicts are among the most intractable and unamenable to reason and
compromise. The problems of political integration and legitimacy, while
present to some extent in all states, are compounded in multinational states.
In short, it seems that a great many people care passionately whether the>
are ruled and exploited by members of their own ethny or by foreigners.
Where many grudgingly put up with the former, they lose little opportunity
to rebel against the latter. Why?
On the face of it, it should make little difference whether one is fleeced
by people who speak one's own language or a foreign tongue. Yet, it clearly
does make an important difference—often the difference between passive,
reluctant acquiescence and sometimes suicidal rebellion. I have already
suggested the answer as to why the nation-state is a more viable political
entity than the multinational state. The nation-state is legitimated by kin
selection—the most fundamental basis of animal sociality. Conversely, that
basis of legitimacy is not available to the multinational state. Queen Victoria
could cut a motherly figure in England; she even managed to proclaim her
son the Prince of Wales; but she could never hope to become anything
except a foreign ruler of India. Similarly, the fiction that the Emperor of

63
Japan is the head of the most senior lineage descended from the common
ancestor of all Japanese might convince the Japanese peasant that the Emperor is an exalted cousin of his, but the myth lacks credibility in Korea or
Taiwan.
THE NATION-STATE
Before looking at the systems of ethnic domination imposed on multinational states, let us look more closely at the emergence of the nation-state
and at the legitimation of rule in the nation-state. There are basically two
ways in which primary states are formed: externally through conquest and
internally through centralization of power.* That is, an ethny can conquer
its neighbors, impose itself as a ruling class over them and thus create a
multiethnic state. Alternatively, within an ethny, an individual or group
can gradually assert authority over the rest of the ethny, thus giving rise to
a nation-state. Though the two processes are distinct, they are often complementary. Centralization of power within the ethny, as it typically gives
rise to a more cohesive political and military organization, often facilitates
enlargement by conquest. Conversely, if the fruits of conquest are to be
reaped, the conquering group must develop a system of permanent domination, and this fosters the development of centralized power within the
conquering group. In practice, then, states are typically seen to emerge out
of a double process of external conquest and internal centralization of power.
When political (and, indeed, other social) scientists think of nation-states,
they generally tend to project the European experience since the Renaissance. This is unfortunate since nearly all European states for the last 2000
years or so are secondary formations that fragmented or emerged from previously existing states. Many European states, including some comparatively small ones (e.g. Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Belgium and Switzerland),
are multinational states—not nation-states. As for those European states that
come close to being real nations, they were created either through the political and military consolidation of multistatal nations (e.g. Germany and
Italy in the 19th century) or through the disintegration of multinational
empires (e.g. The Netherlands in the 16th century, Poland, and Hungary
and, briefly, Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania in the 20th century). In both
cases, the nation and the state had coexisted for centuries, but they were
not coextensive. Either the nation was split up into a multiplicity of squabbling statelets (as in Germany, Italy and, earlier, France) or a multiplicity
of captive nations were ruled by large empires dominated by one or more
ethnic groups (such as Austria-Hungary, Russia, Ottoman Turkey and
Spain).
Except for Switzerland, a loose confederation that grew from within over
the last seven centuries, and a few statelets left over from the Middle Ages
like Monaco, Andorra and San Marino, all contemporary European states
* Secondary states can be formed from existing states through secession, of course.

64
emerged as complex bureaucratic machines from other complex states. Belgium, for instance, a relatively new state born in 1830 out of the collapse
of the Napoleonic Empire and the shambles of the Congress of Vienna, was,
from the outset, a full-blown, modern, bureaucratic state (but not a nation),
and in barely over half a century, it launched on a vast colonial adventure
in the Congo.
Clearly, then, Europe in recent centuries is a poor exemplar of either the
nation-state or, much less, of how nation-states first developed out of stateless societies. Africa, which until recently still had many stateless societies
and where a number of states had recently emerged or were emerging at the
time of the European conquest, is much more instructive in this respect.
States start in agricultural and/or pastoralist societies, usually from modest
and inconspicuous beginnings, at the village level. Indeed, the core unit
around which state institutions slowly emerge is typically small enough to
be a subethny, a single local community within an ethny. Certain basic
conditions have to be present before a state can emerge: sedentary villages,
agriculture and/or livestock raising, some storable surplus production, and
the beginnings of inequality in status and access to resources between adult
men.
From these general background conditions characteristic of many tropical
horticulturalists, the embryonic state typically develops around village
chieftaincy. An individual, because of luck, skill, political acumen, manipulation of religious functions or simply the help of a large group of kinsmen,
begins to assert his authority and to claim privileges over villagers other
than his wives or junior kinsmen over whom his domestic authority would
extend in any case. The germ of chieftaincy is thus the assertion of authority
and privilege beyond the domestic sphere of marriage and kinship relations
that characterize all human societies, including stateless ones, and which
are based principally on sex and seniority. If an individual claims and is
granted authority over people who are not related to him by blood or marriage, that group has an embryonic state.
The specific bases of chieftaincy vary somewhat from society to society,
but the basic ingredients of it are few and repeatedly found. One is religious
charisma, as noted long ago by a number of social scientists (James G. Frazer,
1890; Mauss, 1924; Weber, 1968, first published in 1922). A person acquires
power by performing religious functions and by claiming special powers of
healing, divination or witchcraft. Theocracies and divine kingships are very
common. Indeed, the notion of totally secularized power is quite recent
(barely 200 or so years old) and, even today, seldom realized in practice.
The king is typically a priest (and magician as well) and his power hinges
on the gift of grace and the magical properties (especially fecundity) attributed to him. Monarchical power rests almost invariably on a basis of religious ideology. When that basis of legitimacy is extended from an individual
to his kin and is hereditarily transmitted, then a clear transition occurs from
incipient chieftaincy to an established monarchy.
Another frequent component of incipient chieftaincy is the principle of
seniority inherent in kinship organization. This is especially effective in

65
unilineal descent societies (either patrilineal or matrilineal) in which one
line of descent (male or female) is stressed, thereby giving rise to large,
cohesive kin groups, known as lineages and clans. In nearly all human
societies, authority over kin is allocated on the basis of seniority (often
qualified by mental competence). A man has authority over his junior relatives. If a lineage is numerically important in a village, its head obviously
has a political advantage over heads of smaller lineages and may use that
advantage to extend his authority over them. This extension of authority
over nonkin often becomes institutionized through a claim (often mythical)
that a particular clan or lineage is collectively senior to other clans and
lineages—for example, by representing the descent line of the eldest son of
the mythical founding ancestor. When the principle of seniority is extended
from individuals to descent groups, the kinsmen of the chief automatically
acquire an aura of superiority; they begin to constitute a royal clan on which
the power of the king rests and from which his successor will be chosen.
A third common, indeed practically universal, feature of emergent chieftaincy is polygyny. Polygyny is also found, on a limited scale, in stateless
societies, but the scope of it is greatly extended in politically centralized
societies. One of the very first privileges and benefits accruing from political
power is access to reproductive women. This occurs long before marked
differences in lifestyle, diet, dress, consumption, housing and so on develop
between rulers and ruled. Even in small-scale village-level societies where
the chief lives much like everyone else, he already has more wives. Power,
in short, is immediately converted into fitness, i.e. reproductive success.
Since political power is predominantly wielded by men, our discussion
of it is in the male gender. But it must be noted here that there is a simple
biological reason why polygamy is a uniquely male reward of power. A
man can greatly increase his fitness by having several wives; a woman does
not derive a comparable advantage by being polyandrous.
Polygyny, and thereby reproductive success, is not merely a reward of
power. It is also a means of consolidating and perpetuating it. This is done
in two ways: first, by producing more kinsmen and thus enlarging the size
of one's kin group and, second, by establishing ties of alliance and reciprocity with other kin groups through marrying off one's daughters to other
groups and taking wives from other groups. The king, through matrimonial
politics, can thus easily become father-in-law, son-in-law or brother-in-law
to many of his subjects and be at the hub of a network of matrimonial
alliances. Indeed, fertility is frequently associated with kingship. The king
is expected to have many children, and his powers of fertility are, by extension, assumed to be magically related with the well-being of the nation,
so that his continued potency is a prequisite to his retention of political
office. Regicide of aging kings is a common feature of many monarchies
(James G. Frazer, 1890).
Since the setting within which states emerge is typically a sedentary
agricultural village, the state originally encompasses a single ethny or, indeed, only a section thereof. Ethnic homogeneity is, of course, one of the
facilitating conditions in the emergence of states. To the extent that the

66
ethny or subethny is already conceived of as an extended kin group, chieftaincy itself is seen as a mere extension of the preexisting authority structure
within the corporate kin group. The village chief is not yet an exploiter: he
is merely a primus inter pares among lineage or family heads—a kind of
superfather of a superfamily. At that embryonic level, there is not yet a clear
stratification between rulers and ruled, although many such societies already have one variety or other of domestic slavery. There is not yet any
systematic exploitation (except of slaves who are generally outsiders), not
any taxation, not any appropriation of surplus production by the few, and
not any evident signs of wealth, status and hierarchy between free men. The
chief is still mainly an influential leader, a mediator and an adviser, rather
than a boss, a judge or a policeman. His authority is still bound by custom
and relies on consent rather than coercion.
This embryonic state of affairs can last a long time if there are no strong
pressures toward further centralization of power (such as endemic warfare
sometimes fosters), and if the system of production limits the amount storable surplus and thus the exploitability of human labor. Where wealth is
created in substantial, storable and stealable quantities (which can happen
in pastoralist societies and in the more intensive forms of tropical horticulture), states can develop, consolidate and expand quite rapidly. Villages
on the road to chieftaincy often have an organizational advantage in warfare
and can thus establish hegemony over neighboring communities, giving rise
to loose confederations of villages. At this level, we are still typically within
the confines of a single ethny. We are witnessing in fact the birth of a nationstate.
Loose village confederacies headed by a nominal priest-chief can in turn
coalesce into a full-blown statelet headed by a real king with executive
powers of life and death, and with a retinue of wives, relatives, courtiers,
appointed officials and bodyguards. His powers may still be limited by
custom and checked by a council of elders, but he is now a genuine monarch
who gives orders, passes judgement, distributes rewards and punishments,
accepts and collects tribute. In short, the king now exercizes a definite
amount of coercion, derives direct material benefits from his rule and relies
on a circle of supporters who constitute the germ of a ruling class and who
are the beneficiaries of the king's favors.
So long as all this takes place within the ethny, the problems of legitimacy
are still mitigated by an ideology of extended kin selection. The growth of
national consciousness that accompanies this process of political centralization is usually fostered by a myth of common origin in which the king
is the living head of the royal clan, which, in turn, is only one branch of
the descendants of the common ancestor.
The ideology of kingship is one of extended kinship. The king is a paternal
figure, a superfather of a superfamily, tied to his subjects by multiple bonds
of blood and marriage. He is, in fact, often looked upon as the living symbol
of the nation, the embodiment of its collective spirit, the last incarnation
of the common ancestor and the symbolic father of the nation. Kingship is
merely the political expression of the nation. With even considerably more

67
justification than Louis XIV, the king can truly say, L'etat c'est moi or, better
yet, La nation c'est moi.
Because of its ready-made ideology of extended kinship, the ethny is, one
might say, the natural matrix of the nascent state. Political institutions of
kingship find a ready justification so long as they grow within the confines
of a preexisting ethny. An embryonic state can extend without much difficulty to the outer boundaries of the ethny and assimilate neighboring
groups that speak mutually understandable dialects, share similar traditions
and see each other as, somehow, related. However, where conquest crosses
an ethnic boundary (that is when the state becomes multinational), a whole
new order of problems of legitimacy arises, and a set of important thresholds
are crossed. The multiethnic or multinational state is a qualitatively different
entity from the nation-state. It necessarily grows out of external conquest;
it lacks prima facie legitimacy; it rests on naked coercion; it results in a
sharp group hierarchy; and it leads to visible and resented exploitation by
foreigners. While, in the nation-state, coercion and exploitation are both
blunted and concealed by the preexisting ideology of extended kinship that
underlies the concept of ethny and nation, the multiethnic state stands

naked as the instrument of the ruling group, typically the conquering ethnic

group as a whole, or a smaller group drawn overwhelmingly from it.
Let us illustrate this sharp contrast with two "traditional," i.e. precolonial,
African states: Swaziland in Southeastern Africa and Rwanda in the very
heart of the continent. Although Rwanda covers twice as big an area as
Swaziland, and has ten times it population, the two states share some broad
similaries of ecology, technology and social organization. They occupy
roughly the same type of habitat (mountainous tropics or subtropics, in a
warm, well-irrigated setting). They both have much the same economic
level. They are both patrilineal, virilocal, polygynous societies with a
broadly similar type of kinship and family organization. Even their political
institutions resemble each other in their broad features and have much the
same antiquity: both are hereditary monarchies, with an interesting and
uniquely African balance of authority between the king and queen mother.
Both have existed for several centuries before European rule, and both regained their political sovereignty in the 1960s after a colonial interlude of
three generations.
The overwhelmingly striking difference between them, however, is that
Swaziland is a genuine nation-state, one of the few in Africa, while Rwanda
was, until the revolution of 1959-1963, a multiethnic castelike society dominated by Tuzi conquerors. It is to this sharp contrast, and to its dramatic
recent consequences that I now turn.

SWAZILAND
Swaziland is a mere speck on the map of Africa—some 15,000 square kilometers in size, or about half the size of Belgium. Sandwiched between the
Republic of South Africa and Mozambique, it was drawn into the competing
imperialisms of the Boer and the British and, though never conquered by

68
arms, it first became incorporated into the sphere of influence of the Transvaal Republic, and then it became a British High Commission Territory (in
effect, a protectorate) after the Boer defeat in the War of 1899-1902. After
some three generations of colonialism, it regained its formal political sovereignty in 1968, and became one of a handful of genuine African nationstates. The present population of the kingdom is approximately 300,000,
some 7% of whom are non-Swazi, mostly people of European origin (numbering about 8000) or closely related Bantu-speakers from neighboring territories. Perhaps another 100,000 Swazi live in the Republic of South Africa
(Hilda Kuper, 1947a, 1947b, 1963, 1978; Marwick, 1 9 4 0 ) /
Unlike many states that are members of the United Nations, but have yet
to become nations, the Swazi have been a nation long before they received
international recognition as such. The ruling Dlamini clan traces its genealogy back about 25 generations, and the kingdom emerged about 200
years ago out of an amalgam of closely related Nguni and Sotho clans
(subgroups of the "Southeastern Bantu") which was gradually welded together into a nation under the Dlamini dynasty. European contact in the late
19th century accelerated this process of monarchical centralization under
the Dlamini. Swazi is a name given to them by Europeans after a corruption
of the name of a 19th century king, Mswati, but they refer to themselves as
the "people of Ngwane" or the "people of Sobhuza," two important 19th
century kings, of whom the present reigning monarch, Sobhuza II, is a
descendant (and, incidentally, the longest-reigning monarch in the world).
Details about the origins of the kingdom are lost in the night of time, but
it emerged around one clan, the Dlamini, from which every king must come.
It grew by cultural absorption of native San groups and of immigrants and
refugees, and by conquest of neighboring groups of closely related language
and culture, who were gradually assimilated into a unitary state through
diplomacy and matrimonial alliances with the royal clan.
In social organization, the Swazi resemble the other Southeastern Bantu.
They have patrilineal descent; marriage is virilocal (i.e. the bride goes to
live with her husband and his male kinsmen) and sanctioned by payment
of a large bridewealth in cattle [lobola). Divorce is permitted but rare. Polygyny is desired and is the rule for older men of high status. Authority
*The problem of the "ethnographic: present" plagues much anthropology insofar as descriptions
of "traditional" systems have often attempted to freeze an ever-changing reality into a static
structural framework. Often, several time-frames have been compressed into one "ethnographic
present." My second-hand account, drawn from ethnological work stretching over 30 years, is
no exception. The following account describes a "traditional" system that developed before
European conquest and continued to exist in modified form thereafter. The very label "traditional"
is misleading for it implies that the pre-European system was static. In fact, it was continuously
evolving, thus eluding description as an ideal model. Yet, European contact did constitute an
important discontinuity in Swazi history, so great a discontinuity that many contemporary analysts (including Heribert Adam on reading this account in manuscript form) would largely
discount the relevance of the past for the present. The emphasis here is not on an understanding
of contemporary Swazi politics, but on the evolution of the "traditional" system. All the problems
of trying to freeze a changing reality into a static account of a "traditional" system also apply to
my account of Rwanda.

69
within the large, virilocal, polygynous, extended families is exercised by
the oldest male who is the head of the localized lineage segment. Inheritance
of property (mostly cattle) is in the male line, but the relative rank of cowives in polygynous households determines which of the sons is the main
heir of his father.
The Swazi economy is based mainly on hoe horticulture of maize, millet,
groundnuts, beans, gourds, pumpkins and other crops, and animal husbandry, principally of cattle, but also of goats, sheep and poultry. Hunting and
gathering play a subsidiary role. Women do the bulk of the agricultural
work, while men tend the livestock. Land tenure is communal and land
cannot be sold or alienated. It is held in trust by persons in political authority
and allocated for agricultural use to individual families, according to their
needs. Wives, in turn, are allocated individual gardens by their husbands.
Grazing lands are used in common. Cattle, the principal form of wealth and
necessary to the acquisitions of wives, are owned by individual men, with
the king as the largest owner (some 3000 heads out of 334,000 for the Swazi
as a whole, in 1936). Except for a few ritual specialists (medicine men and
diviners), there is little division of labor beyond age and sex.
The central political institution of the Swazi nation is the kingship, of
which the incumbent king is but the living representative. The king symbolizes the spirit of the Swazi nation; called Ngwenyama (Lion), the king
is a lineal descendant of the founder of the dynasty and is at the apex of a
system of graded prestige between lineages and clans, whose relative ranking
is determined by closeness of filiation to the king. The 70-odd clans in the
Swazi nation are divided into four broad categories of prestige depending
on the number of kin and marriage links with the king and the royal Dlamini
clan, and the number of political offices bestowed by the king on clan
members.
There are no sharp differences in wealth between clans, not even between
the royal clan and the others, and thus the Swazi do not have social classes
in the usual sense. They do not even have slavery. However, substantial
wealth differences (principally in the form of cattle ownership, converted
into polygyny) existed between individuals. Some of the older men in politically important positions have hundreds of cattle and a number of wives.
As the distribution of political offices, such as district chieftaincies, is controlled by the king and is openly nepotistic, close relatives of the king are
much more likely to be rich and powerful than members of commoner clans
and to have many more wives and children. But there are no clear differences
in lifestyle between the Dlamini and the other clans. Only the king himself
stands out as the biggest cattle owner, polygynist and father of the kingdom.
The king is not an absolute monarch. His power is held in check by the
countervailing weight of the queen-mother, who holds her own separate
court and has certain traditional functions. In addition, the king has to abide
by the opinions of two councils, a smaller inner council of about 20, composed of senior members of the Dlamini clan (a kind of House of Lords) and
a much larger house of commons made up of nonroyal chiefs, headmen and

70
lineage heads. The two councils must achieve consensus, and the king, who
is the last to speak, cannot safely overrule his councils. In case of disagreement between the two councils, the king should try to resolve the issue,
but if he is unsuccessful, the matter is shelved.
There is no strict primogeniture in succession to the throne. Instead, the
heir is born to the royal wife of highest rank and to avoid competition for
the throne, it is preferred that the main royal wife bear the king only one
son. The king's mother on accession of her son to the throne becomes the
second most important personage in the kingdom. When the king's mother
dies, a classificatory mother, such as a mother's sister, is substituted to play
that role. The classificatory mother must belong to the same clan as the
king's mother, and may even be a king's wife from that clan (Hilda Kuper,
personal communication).
The Swazi monarchy is buttressed by religious ritual that continuously
legitimizes the kingship as the symbolic incarnation of the nation. As the
king is strong and fertile, so is the nation. The great ritual of kingship and
fertility (IncwaJa) is at once a fir§t fruits ceremony and a renewal of the
kingship and the nation. It constitutes the core drama of Swazi national
solidarity and is celebrated every year when there is an adult king on the
throne.
Clearly, the Swazi are a politically conscious ethny—a unitary nation.
The symbol of that unity is the king who stands in the position of a superfather to a superfamily. This is true in a triple sense. As an extensive polygynist with scores or hundreds of children, he literally sires a large
progeny. But he is also the head of the prolific and powerful royal clan, a
clan whose size is constantly increased by the polygyny of the king's kinsmen. Since the king's favors are nepotistically dispensed, the royal clan he
heads is a superclan in terms of wealth and reproductive success.
Finally, the extensive polygyny of the king allows him to play a complex
game of matrimonial alliances linking him to the commoner clans through
multiple ties of blood and affinity. The king deliberately marries women
from the various clans of his kingdom; indeed, he has a moral obligation
and is expected to do so. In turn, he gives away his many daughters in
marriage to favored chiefs in other clans. The king as superpolygynist thus
finds himself a father-in-law, brother-in-law or son-in-law to the leaders of
most commoner clans and through his female relatives has nephews and
grandchildren scattered to the four winds of his realm. Conversely, many
commoner clans have kin through females in the royal Dlamini clan.
Hilda Kuper, who through her masterly biography of King Sobhuza II has
established herself as the foremost authority on Swazi kingship, states it
well:
The Swazi say. Inkosi kabili (a king is king twice). He is king not only of the
nation but also of his own kin, the Maiangeni (children of the sun); the two are
interwoven. . . . When Sobhuza's people talk of him as "child of the nation" and
"father of the nation," they are not using meaningless metaphors (Hilda Kuper,
1978, p. 118).

71
The king is thus clearly the hub of a vast network of nepotism that extends
over the entire ethny. The children of kings and the senior branches of the
Dlamini clan are called "children of the sun," constituting a social and
political elite. More distant relatives are less exalted but still receive the
royal title of Nkosi. The king's in-laws also receive royal favor. Obviously,
not everyone in a nation of 300,000 can be a kinsman of the king; but, thanks
to polygyny, enough people belonging to enough commoner clans can trace
a tie of blood or marriage to the king or one of his predecessors to weld the
entire nation into a vast system of kin selection, a grand extended family
with the king as its superfather in a real as well as a symbolic way. The
king is the nation and the nation is the king.
It must be noted that, despite "modernizing" influences, the Swazi monarchy has survived well over a decade of formal political independence.
Indeed, since independence from Britain in 1968, the Swazi rejected the
Westminster-style constitution that the British thought would appropriately
"democratize" and "modernize" the nation, and reverted to something
closer to their traditional system. British-style parliamentary elections were
found divisive of national solidarity. King Sobhuza II dissolved Parliament
in 1972. New elections were held; a new Parliament unanimously declared
the Constitution unworkable, and called on the king to resolve the crisis.
In 1973, the King-in-Council formally repealed the Constitution to the loud
approval of a crowd of his loyal subjects. It remains to be seen whether the
Swazi monarchy, surrounded as it is by republican regimes of the right and
left, can survive its present king; but even if it does not, the political change
is unlikely to degenerate into the orgy of genocidal violence which engulfed
Rwanda.

RWANDA
Rwanda is about twice the size of Swaziland (26,000 km2) and its population
of three million is about ten times bigger, giving it an extremely high population density for tropical highlands (about 115 inhabitants per square
kilometer). Not surprisingly, famines recur every few years when the rainfall
is inadequate. Rwanda is more tropical than Swaziland since it lies only 2°
south of the equator, but its higher elevation (mostly between 1200 and
2500 m) gives it a mild climate. The hilly landscape interspersed with lakes
is among the most beautiful in the world.
As we already noted, there are a number of broad similarities between
Swazi and Rwanda society (d'Hertefelt, 1965; de Heusch, 1966; Lemarchand,
1970; Maquet, 1957,1961). Both rely on an intensive form of hoe horticulture
for the bulk of their food. The main crops in Rwanda are beans, peas,
sorghum, millet, maize, sweet potatoes, cassava and bananas, and the bulk
of the agricultural work, as in Swaziland, is done by women. The same
domesticated animals constitute the livestock of both countries: mostly cattle (the principal source of wealth and the main source of bridewealth
necessary to acquire a wife) but also goats, sheep and poultry.

72
Like the Swazi, the Rwanda live in clusters of beehive-shaped houses
scattered over hillsides. The basic residential unit in both cases is the virilocal, extended, polygynous family, and descent is traced patrilineally.
Authority within the lineage is exercized by seniority in the male line.
The clans and subclans are exogamous, and marriage is by bridewealth,
usually of a cow and subsidiary gifts. Poor people without cattle can substitute goats, hoes or even bride service for the cow. Divorce is possible but
relatively infrequent. Polygyny is preferred and is the rule among older men
of wealth and status.
Even the Rwanda monarchy, with its balance of power between the king
and the queen-mother and its quasisacred conception of kingship, bears a
broad similarity with that of the Swazi and many other kingdoms of Eastern
Africa. This is scarcely surprising as numerous waves of migration down
Eastern Africa, from the Nile Valley and the Ethiopian highlands southward,
led to the diffusion of many culture traits over the entire area.
One thing, however, that Rwanda clearly lacks is nationhood. Rwanda is
a sharply hierarchized society divided into three quasicaste groups: the
dominant Tuzi who, until the revolution of the early 1960s, made up some
17% of the population, the Hutu peasantry with some 82%, and a small
Pygmoid group, the Twa, making up 1% of the total. The monarchy, established by the pastoralist Tuzi conquerors who came down from Ethiopia in
the 16th century, was entirely the political instrument of the Tuzi as an
ethnic ruling elite. The traditional political system was maintained through
a regime of "indirect rule" during the German and then Belgian colonial
interlude. The European colonial administration kept the traditional Tuzi
chiefs in place so long as they collaborated with the colonial authorities and
ruled through them. For purposes of syntaxic consistency, the political and
social system I shall describe will be referred to in the present tense, even
though it was destroyed in 1960 by a violent Hutu revolution.
The Tuzi, who are Nitotic pastoralists similar in physical features to the
Galla and other peoples of Ethiopia, are a racially and socially self-conscious
ruling group, deliberately using the state machinery they monopolize (except at the lowest village level), to dominate and exploit the Hutu peasantry.
They developed a genuine racist ideology, taking pride in their slender, tall
stature (some 15 cm taller than the Hutu, and 30 cm taller than the Twa,
on the average) and their distinctive facial features (such as their aquiline
nose) and looking down on both the Hutu and Twa as coarse, ugly and
inferior. The Pygmoid Twa in particular are regarded by both Tuzi and Hutu
as apelike and barely human and treated with a kind of amused condescension. The Tuzi regard themselves and are regarded by others as intelligent, astute in political intrigue, born to command, refined, courageous
and cruel. The Hutu are viewed by their Tuzi masters much as peasants are
all over the world. They are seen as hardworking, not very clever, extrovert,
irascible, unmannerly, obedient and physically strong. As for the Twa, they
are considered gluttonous, loyal to their Tuzi masters, lazy and lacking in
restraint (Maquet, 1961). These attributes are regarded as inherent in the

73
nature of each group, though somewhat modified by learning; i.e. Rwanda
developed a genuine brand of indigenous racism.
Each group has its fixed, ordained place in the social order. The Twa are
a small pariah caste of hunters, potters, iron-workers and archers in the Tuzi
army. They are strictly endogamous and are looked down upon by both
Hutu and Tuzi. The Hutu till the land, tend the cattle owned by the Tuzi
and are the source of the surplus production on which the Tuzi live parasitically. The Tuzi, headed by the Mwami (king), are the ruling aristocracy.
They specialize in warfare and administration, despise manual labor and
endeavor to spend as much of their lives in conspicuous leisure as possible.
Tuzi women spend their time playing music, weaving fine artistic baskets
and supervising domestic servants. Both Tuzi men and women avoid even
walking long distances; instead they are carried in basketry litters by their
Hutu or Twa servants. (So, incidentally, were often Belgian colonial officials
on inspection tours before the advent of the automobile.)
"Passing" from one group to the other is difficult due to the rather strikingly different phenotypes of the three groups, but, of course, considerable
miscegenation took place over generations, as Tuzi men regularly take on
Hutu women as concubines (although seldom as regular wives). Marriages
between Twa and Hutu are also rare and stigmatized, and a Tuzi woman
would almost never condescend to marry " d o w n " to a Hutu man. Nevertheless, there are a number of people whose fathers are Tuzi and mothers
Hutu and who, over time, gradually insinuate themselves into the lower
ranks of the Tuzi aristocracy. The Twa are close to being a genuine selfenclosed caste, but the boundaries between the Hutu and the Tuzi, though
highly rigid and hierarchical, allow some upward mobility for the Hutu
through miscegenation. These two groups are thus best described as quasicastes.
The basic relationship between Tuzi lord and Hutu peasant is a feudal,
paternalistic one. Underlying the entire political structure, there is, much
as in medieval Europe or Japan, a vast network of patron-client ties that
link individuals in private contracts where protection is exchanged for loyalty. These ties extend up and down the social hierarchy, between the
Mwami and his highest courtiers, between aristocrats of different ranks and
between Tuzi aristocrats and Hutu peasants and Twa servants. In the case
of the Hutu peasant, he receives, besides the protection of this Tuzi master
(mostly against abusive treatment from other Tuzi), one or more head of
cattle to care for. In exchange for being allowed to till his fields and to keep
the milk and the male offspring of the Tuzi-owned cows, the Hutu client
owes his Tuzi master loyalty, banana beer and other agricultural tribute,
and any labor services his patron may request. The Tuzi, in addition, keep
property of the cows and all female calves.
The central political institution of this complex system of feudal exploitation is the monarchy. Unlike the Swazi king who incarnates the spirit of
the nation, the Mwami of Rwanda is the head of the Tuzi nobility and the
supreme ruler of the Hutu and Twa subjects. The state is not the political

74
expression of the nation as it still is to a considerable degree among the
Swazi, but the exploitative instrument of the ruling ethnic elite. The Mwami,
like his Swazi counterpart, is also highly polygynous, but his polygyny
reflects more his preeminent royal droit de cuissage than a careful policy
of allying himself through marriage with commoner lineages and clans, as
is the case with Swazi kings.
In theory, the Mwami's power is absolute. He possesses a preeminent
right over all the land and cattle, and a right of life or death over his subjects.
He appoints his heir from among his younger sons, subject, however, to
official announcement by court ritualists and violent challenge by ambitious
half-brothers of the heir. Finally, his person and office are surrounded by
a quasidivine aura and dramatized by the careful keeping of sacred regalia,
such as the royal drums to which blood offerings are regularly made, and
onto which are attached the genitalia of defeated foreign rulers (d'Hertefelt,
1965).
In practice, however, the power of the Mwami is not as absolute as the
Rwanda theory of divine right would have it. Royal power is counterbalanced by that of the queen-mother and her court, by the hereditary offices
and privileges of his powerful Tuzi vassals, and by ritual dignitaries in
charge of secret codes and rites considered essential to the continuation of
the kingship (including announcing the king's heir on his death). It must
be noted that such restraints as exist on royal power emanate almost entirely
from the Tuzi nobility, not from the people as a whole. There is no representative organ or even informal channel for the expression of opinion for
the Hutu or the Twa as there is in the Swazi "House of Commons." Hutu
and Twa are governed without even a fiction of consent.
The Rwanda monarchy, in short, had not only achieved a greater measure
of centralized power at the time of European conquest than was the case in
Swaziland, but it was also far more coercive, exploitative, arbitrary and
absolutistic. Rwanda was a multiethnic state run for the benefit of the Tuzi
aristocracy. Swaziland is a genuine nation-state where royal power is subject
to a wide measure of consent, hemmed in by genuine representative institutions.
The lack of legitimacity of Tuzi power on the part of the Hutu became
immediately apparent when political independence from Belgium was imminent. During the Belgian trusteeship period, a new elite of Western-educated Hutu had graduated from Catholic mission schools, and it was these
evolues, as the Belgians called them somewhat invidiously, who led the
challenge against Tuzi domination. Nevertheless, they found immediate,
enthusiastic and nearly unanimous support among the Hutu peasantry who
saw an unprecedented opportunity to overthrow Tuzi rule. The Hutu revolution broke out in November 1959 with outbreaks of local peasant jacqueries against their Tuzi overlords (Leo Kuper, 1977). Tuzi chiefs were
killed and their property burned and looted; the Tuzi retaliated. Several
elections took place in 1960 and 1961 under Belgian and then United Nations supervision, and Hutu-dominated parties polled about 80% of the
votes and rejected the monarchy by the same margin. (Not coincidentally,

75
that figure corresponded closely to the Hutu percentage in the Rwanda
population.) The Mwami and many Tuzi followers fled Rwanda into neighboring countries, and a "democratic republic" with a presidential regime
was established in July 1962.
The new regime did not put an end to anti-Tuzi hostility, however. Hutu
politicians organized campaigns of terrorism against the Tuzi, and Tuzi
refugees (some 130,000 of them by the end of 1963) retaliated by mounting
guerrilla raids from neighboring territories. In total, perhaps about 12,000
people, overwhelmingly Tuzi, were massacred in 1962-1963, in an escalating orgy of arson, pillage, rape, torture and mutilations characteristic of
ethnic conflicts. By now, Tuzi rule over Rwanda has been completely broken, and most Tuzi are in exile. As a counterpoint to the grim story of
Rwanda, independence in Burundi (another Tuzi-dominated kingdom to
the south of Rwanda) was also accompanied by a genocidal orgy, but there
the Hutu were the principal victims.

COERCION AND LEGITIMACY IN M U L T I N A T I O N A L S T A T E S
Clearly, multiethnic states face a problem of legitimacy that is incommensurable with that of nation-states. It is true that the larger, the more bureaucratized, the more centralized and the more exploitative a nation-state
becomes, the thinner the fiction of common kinship wears, and, thus, the
more problematic legitimacy becomes. Still, common nationhood, so long
as the fiction of common descent retains the appearance of plausibility,
remains a powerful rationale for state power. Being plucked by people who
speak your language, share your customs and values, and are, however
vaguely and remotely "your people" is more tolerable than being exploited
by foreign conquerors.
Perhaps the soundest reason why foreign conquest and domination are
so deeply resented is that they almost invariably represent a direct threat
to the biological fitness of the conquered. The very reproductive success
and, hence, biological survival of the conquered group is at stake. It is no
accident that military conquest is so often accompanied by the killing, enslavement and castration of males, and the raping and capturing of females
for purposes of enhancing the fitness of the conquerors.
Even when conquest is relatively mild and not openly genocidal, the
subordinate group in an ethnic hierarchy almost invariably "loses" more
women to males of the dominant group than vice versa. Hypergamy (mating
upward for women) is a fitness-enhancing strategy for women, and, therefore, subordinate-group women do not always resist being "taken over" by
dominant-group men. But subordinate-group men lose fitness by loosing
potential mates from their group without any hope of access to dominantgroup females. It is not accidental that the most explosive aspect of interethnic relations is sexual contact across ethnic (or racial) lines; nor is the
asymmetry of the resentment surprising. No group is concerned about gaining women; every group resents losing women.
Conquest and domination mean, in the first instance, a fitness loss. The

76
loss is felt both at the individual and at the collective level. Collectively,
since the offspring of subordinate-group women who mate with dominantgroup men are generally "lost" to their maternal group, the subordinate
group suffers a decrement of reprodutive power. Over several generations,
this loss can be reflected in serious demographic changes in ethnic group
ratios. Dominant groups tend to grow disproportionately. Individually, there
is only a fitness reduction if the circulation of women between groups is
asymmetrical, as it almost invariably is. Through the suction of women into
the upper group (without getting women in return), the pool of mates for
lower-group males is correspondingly reduced and, therefore, so is their
fitness. Females of the subordinate group also indirectly lose fitness through
the lowered fitness of their male relatives. Individual females who choose
the hypergamous strategy, however, can gain fitness if their children become
assimilated to the ruling group and gain access to upper-group privileges
(including polygyny). This sex asymmetry in fitness strategies in ethnically
stratified societies often creates tension between the sexes, within subordinate groups. The female option of fitness maximization through hypergamy is deeply resented by subordinate-group males.
How do multiethnic states, or "plural societies" as they have also been
called, cope with this problem of legitimacy? The range of solutions is
limited, and is determined by two main variables: (1) the degree to which
one ethny (or coalition of ethnies) monopolizes power and privilege to the
exclusion of all others, and (2) the degree to which citizens of plural societies
are incorporated into the state as individuals or as members of their respective collectivities (Leo Kuper and M.G. Smith, 1969).
On the first variable, some multiethnic states, like traditional Rwanda or
contemporary South Africa, represent one extreme where one ethnic (or
racial) group single-handedly monopolizes power and actively excludes
other groups from participation. These polities are classic cases of imperial
conquest states or colonial societies, in which the state is the political arm
of the ruling ethnic group. At the other extreme are a few polities like
Belgium or Switzerland, where several ethnies coexist according to some
negotiated modus vivendi, but where none dominates the others. Such
states, called "consociational democracies" by Lijphart (1968a) or "proportional democracies" by Lehmbruch (1967), are actually relatively few.
Since they are not held together by coercion, the maintenance of a working
political compromise between ethnies is always a delicate and chancy endeavor. In between these extremes are a number of states where one ethny
or a small coalition of ethnies plays a preponderant role in the state, but is
more or less willing to share power with other groups or, at least, to coopt
the elites of some of the other groups. Ethiopia, the Soviet Union, the United
States and Israel are a few examples.
The second variable is one of state policy and jural status, and its importance has often been underrated, although it has been of central interest
to the scholars in the "plural society" tradition (Leo Kuper, 1957, 1965,
1974; Leo Kuper and M. G. Smith, 1969; Lowenthal, 1972; Schermerhorn,

77
1970; Michael G. Smith, 1965a; Smooha, 1975, 1978; van den Berghe,
1973b). The key criterion here is whether the state and the legal system give
official recognition to group membership or not. Some states, for example
France, incorporate their citizens purely on an individual basis. They distinguish between citizens and foreigners, but all citizens are equal in the
eyes of the law, subject only to qualifications of age (e.g. children are disfranchised), mental competence, criminal record and, until recently, sex.
The state, at least in principle, does not care whether you are Catholic or
Protestant, white or black, noble or commoner. There are no provisions in
the legal system giving special status to any ethnic, religious, linguistic or
racial subgroup of citizens within the state; all citizens (with the above
qualifications of age, mental competence and so on) have equal rights and
obligations; their relationship to the state is legally identical. Any racial or
ethnic distinctions that may exist are supposed to be ignored by the state
and all of its agencies.
The opposite case is, of course, that of states that officially recognize
different communities within it and entrench that recognition in legislation
giving different groups different rights and obligations. This differential
incorporation according to group membership within the state can be more
or less extensive in scope, more or less discriminatory or benign in intent
and practice, and more or less imposed by force or achieved by consensus
and negotiation. The mere official recognition given by the state and its
legal organs to collectivities within the state, whatever its intent, has profoundly different implications and consequences from those that flow from
a legal system based purely upon individual rights.
Actually, most states resort, to a greater or lesser extent, to differential
incorporation by criteria of group membership. They include nearly all
colonial and imperial regimes, most settlers societies like Australia, South
Africa and the United States, and most multinational states like Belgium,
Nigeria, India and the Soviet Union. Soviet internal passports have a space
for "nationality" (meaning not "Soviet Citizen"—but "Armenian," "Jew,"
"Russian," "Ukrainian" or whatever); the United States still treats American
Indians forborne purposes as members of foreign nations with special land
tenure, fishing, hunting and other rights determined by treaty; South Africa
makes "race" the basis of a vast system of legal discrimination known as
apartheid; Israel pigeonholes its citizens into different religious communities and forces people to abide by Islamic, Christian or Jewish religious
law regardless of whether one is even religious; Belgium forces its citizens
to opt for one language group and categorizes people and municipalities as
either Flemish or Walloon (with a bilingual option for Brussels); India recognizes Harijans ("untouchables") as a special group deserving reserved
seats in Parliament and special protection because of past discrimination,
and so on.
The list of countries whose legal system entrenches differential incorporation is quite long; it would probably include at least two-thirds or threefourths of the members of the United Nations. In some cases (such as South

78
Africa), group discrimination is both malign and all-encompassing; in others
it only affects small minorities and circumscribed aspects of life, and it is
supposedly benign in intent. However, the sheer official recognition of group
differences in rights, privileges and relationship to the state tends to perpetuate (even to create) pluralism and to exacerbate political conflicts between ethnic groups. The case against differential incorporation has been
argued eloquently by Glazer (1975) for the United States, by Srinivas (1969)
for India, by Leo Kuper (1957, 1965, 1974) for South Africa and by many
thoughtful and well-meaning people all over the world. However benevolent
its stated intent, "affirmative discrimination" (to use Glazer's phrase) typically boomerangs because it reinforces the ethnic boundaries it supposedly
tries to erase.*

THE THREE TYPES OF MULTIETHNIC STATES
If we dichotomize the two variables of degree of ethnic monopolization of
power (ethnically exclusive or inclusive) and mode of incorporation into
the state (individual or collective), and if we combine the two variables into

a single schema, we end up with the two-by-two figure of Schema I. A
striking but trivial feature of Schema I is the emptiness of Cell A. In theory,
a ruling group could remain ethnically exclusive and retain a monopoly of
power and yet treat everyone equally as individuals and on the basis of
merit. It could do so if it managed to define merit in such a way as to
maintain a monopoly of it. In practice, no ruling group manages to do so,
though some go quite far in trying. The practical options of an ethnic group
ruling a multiethnic state are to retain a monopoly of power by officially
and legally discriminating against other groups, and thus to form a classical
imperial or colonial system (Cell B) or to move, however slowly, reluctantly,
and gradually toward a Cell C or Cell D situation. The logical end-result of
the latter option is the end of ethnic domination by one group, though
sometimes that process can be slowed down through astute and well-tried
techniques of cooptation and selective assimilation of elites from subordinate groups, of fomenting conflict between subordinate groups, and so on.
Let us briefly examine each of the three types of situation represented by
Cells B, C and D. Cell B is the classical colonial or imperial system in which
one ethny dominates the others. I shall examine this type of polity in greater
detail in Chapter 5, for there are a number of basic similarities in the way
colonial or imperial societies are organized. If we define colonialism as
long-distance imperialism over noncontiguous territories, then we find that
colonialism is really an extreme case of imperialism.
*It has been eloquently argued by the theorists of "consociationalism" (Lehmbruch. 1967;Lijphart,
1968a. 1977a) that the institutionalization of ethnic (or racial) criteria of group membership by
the state need not be discriminatory and invidious, and can lead to stable and successful democratic pluralism. In this respect, the consociationalists clash with the "conflict pluralists" (Leo
Kuper, 1974; Leo Kuper and M. G. Smith, 1969; M. G. Smith, 1965a; Smooha, 1975; van den
Berghe, 1973b) who tend to be pessimistic about the possibility of democratic pluralism. We shall
return to this central issue in Chapter 9.

79
Ethnically exclusive
C

A
Individual (equal)
incorporation

"Liberal
democracy"

No cases

B
Collective (differential)
incorporation

Ethnically inclusive

D
Imperial-colonial
model

"Consociational
democracy"

Indirect rule

SCHEMA I. Ethnic exclusiveness and mode of incorporation.

Since colonialism is usually imposed on ethnies that are very different
both physically and culturally from the conquerors, the social gulf between
rulers and ruled is all the greater and the more unbreachable, and the restraints on exploitation are practically nonexistent. In addition, coionialized
societies are typically smaller-scaled (stateless or small states) and/or at a
simpler level of technology than their colonial masters; otherwise they
would not have been conquered. Therefore, colonial regimes are maximally
coercive and exploitative.
The techniques for ruling empires and colonies are basically the same all
over the world and have been independently rediscovered many times.
Conquered populations can either be assimilated to the conquering group,
selectively at the elite level or in toto, through persuasion or coercion,
gradually or brutally; or ethnic separation can be tolerated, encouraged or
maintained by force, and conquered groups can be administered through a
system of indirect rule. Native institutions are modified to suit the conqueror, but otherwise left as undisturbed as possible; religious, linguistic
and cultural diversity is tolerated; and the local elite is allowed to keep
some of its privileges in exchange for becoming auxiliaries of the imperial
regime. The native ruling class, if such existed before, is allowed a small
share of the spoils for doing the dirty job of running the empire cheaply for
the benefit of the conquerors. Where no such native ruling class existed
before the conquest (as in stateless societies), the colonial regime often
created "native chiefs" who, in time, came to form a pseudotraditional
system invented in the conqueror's image of what a native society ought to
be like.
The term "liberal democracy" applied to Cell C of Schema I is, of course,
a misnomer. No state, whether precapitalist, capitalist or socialist, is a real
democracy, however much it may claim that label. Nor is the ideology of
individualism that underlies this concept of the state a monopoly of 19th-

80
century European liberalism. However, the misnomer is so firmly entrenched in common parlance and in our political thinking, that no satisfactory alternative term exists. (The Marxist term, "bourgeois democracy,"
to distinguish it from "people's democracy" is no more satisfactory. It merely
doubles the number of misnomers, for a "people's democracy" is no more
a democracy than a bourgeois one.)
The type of society in Cell C is one composed of several ethnic groups,
but where two basic conditions prevail:
1. The ruling group is a class drawn from several ethnies; that is, no ethny
has a monopoly or near-monopoly of power.
2. The state officially recognizes only individuals; it may either actively
promote "national integration" or tolerate cultural and linguistic pluralism; but it does nothing to give pluralism official recognition, to grant
certain communities special rights or to entrench pluralism in legislation.
In pure form such situations are rare, first, because historical circumstances usually give one of the ethnic groups in the state a disproportionate
if not exclusive share of power, and, second, because the state is often
forced, or finds it convenient, to recognize the reality of ethnic differences
and to accede to demands for separation and special treatment.
Sometimes it is the dominant majority that seeks to maintain a measure
of exclusiveness; more often minorities seek special status out of fear of
assimilation. Contrary to classical colonial societies where the dominant
ethnic group is a minority (often a very small one of less than 10% or even
less than 1% of the total population), in a "liberal democracy," if there is
a dominant ethnic group, it is a numerical majority.* A dominant ethnic
majority can therefore claim that it rules not by virtue of ethnic exclusivism
but according to "democratic" principles of majority rule. Such a claim
leaves the minorities with little option other than to join the majority by
assimilation (if they are permitted to do so) or to claim special protection
and special rights to retain their separateness (and thereby also their subordination as a minority group).
Even though, in most "liberal democracies," the state takes some steps
in recognizing ethnic diversity (such as enumerating people by ethnic, religious or language group in its population census, giving state subsidies to
ethnically, linguistically or religiously segregated schools), there has long
been a general trend in Europe, Latin America and other states under European influence, to move away from recognition of ethnicity (and religion).
This was part of a trend toward individualism, universalism and secularism
*In much of the U.S. literature on race and ethnic relations, the terms "majority" and "minority"
are used as synonyms for "dominant" and "subordinate." respectively. Since many, if not most,
dominant ethnic groups have been small minorities and subordinate groups are often overwhelming majorities, the use of this terminology is confusing and ethnocentrically American. Therefore,
when I speak of minority and majority. I shall refer only to numerical proportions and not to
relative power positions.

81
that gained momentum since the French Revolution in the late 18th century.
Various groups, such as Jews in Europe, the Burakumin in Japan and slaves
in the Western Hemisphere, which had hitherto been subject to a discriminatory legal status were "emancipated" as a result of the Englightenment.
Assimilation into the rest of the population did not necessarily follow
emancipation, but, at least, the legal possibility of assimilation now existed,
and the expectation generally was that assimilation would come in the end.
The ideal of the liberal state is assimilationist.
Recently, that is, since the 1960s, there seems to have been a resurgence
of ethnic sentiment in many countries that were long thought of as fairly
unitary or at least on an irreversible course of assimilation. Such was the
case, for instance, with the various ethnic racial and ethnic movements
started by "Black Power" in the United States. Even textbook examples of
nation-states, like France, now experience separatist or, at least, regionalist
movements in Corsica, Brittany,Occitania and the Basque country. Whether
this reversion to more ethnic pluralism is a temporary fad or a longer-range
process of disaggregation of multinational states remains to be seen. The
states that seem to be in the most trouble, such as Lebanon, Canada. Britain
(with Northern Ireland) and Belgium belong in Cell D, as we shall see
presently.
Few states, then, qualify as pure "liberal democracy"—pure in the sense
that they give no official recognition whatsoever to ethnic, racial, religious
or language groups within their borders. The states, however, that lean in
the liberal assimilationist direction also tend to be the ones like the United
States (for whites), Israel (for Jews), Australia (for whites) and Brazil, whose
aboriginal populations are small and/or have been extensively wiped out or
expelled, and whose main ethnic groups are territorially dispersed immigrants of fairly recent origin. Such, at least, is the typical matrix for a successful melting pot.
By contrast, societies in Cell D are often, though not always, characterized
by the fact that their principal ethnic groups are both indigenous and nonsympatric. They share a single state apparatus, but each ethnic group has
its own turf. Switzerland, Belgium, Yugoslavia, the Soviet Union, India and
Nigeria are a few examples. There are, however, some would-be consociational democracies where the territorial separation is not as clear-cut, and
where the constituent ethnic groups are immigrants rather than indigenes.
Lebanon, Trinidad, Guiana and Canada are cases in point.
The immigrant-indigenous distinction, while useful up to a point (Lieberson, 1961), breaks down in the end, because if one pushes it back far
enough, everyone is an immigrant, or, conversely, every group regards itself
as indigenous vis-a-vis groups of more recent arrival. However, the degree
to which ethnic groups are sympatric or not is extremely important in terms
of practical consequences. The more territorialized ethnic groups are, and
the larger and more economically viable ethnic territories are, (1) the less

the existence of separate ethnic groups can be ignored by the state; (2) the
more ethnic boundaries are likely to be self-perpetuating; (3) the less likely

82
the groups are to assimilate or melt together; and (4) the less reason they
have to stick together in a single state.
"Consociational democracies" have in common with "liberal democracies" that, though made up of several ethnies, the ruling group is a class
drawn from several ethnies rather than overwhelmingly from a single ethny.
The ruling group is a grand coalition of elites sharing power and distributing
spoils to their ethnic constituencies. Consociational democracies also share
with liberal democracies a fagade of representative and parliamentary institutions, elections, political parties and the other paraphernalia of states
(capitalist, socialist or Third World) that make a pretense of being "democratic." Unlike liberal democracies, however, consociational democracies
institutionalize ethnicity in the political and jural structure of the state.
They officially recognize ethnies, accord them proportional representation
in state organs, run segregated school systems, draw internal boundaries
according to linguistic lines, categorize their citizens by ethnic affiliation,
and grant each group a special legal status. Indeed, they go a long way in
forcing everybody to fit willy-nilly into one of the cells of the multiethnic
mold.
Most states that embark on such an official policy of recognizing and
entrenching ethnic pluralism are quite fragile. Switzerland is perhaps the
one successful example, for reasons to be examined in Chapter 9, but the
unfortunate cases of such states that have exploded in violent conflict or
that constantly seem to be on the brink of doing so are many: Nigeria,
Lebanon, Cyprus, Pakistan-Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Guiana, Canada, Zaire
and numerous others. The reason for the instability of consociational democracies is simple. When confronted with escalating demands for ethnic
separatism, the state faces the basic options of repressing such demands by
force (and thereby damaging its democratic fagade) or of yielding to these
demands (thereby encouraging their further escalation, and taking another
step toward the dissolution of the multinational state).
Now it is time to take a closer look at different types of multiethnic states
and at the problems they present.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Much of the literature on race and ethnic relations deals with inequality. Among the
best general treatments of the subject are the texts by Francis (1976), Mason (1971),
Schermerhom (1970) and Shibutani and Kwan (1965).

II
SOME
RECURRENT
SITUATIONS

This page intentionally left blank

5
COLONIAL EMPIRES

Colonialism is a special form of imperialism. It is imperialism over distant
peoples who usually live in noncontiguous, overseas territories and who
therefore look quite different from their conquerors, speak unrelated languages, and are so culturally alien to their colonial masters as to provide
little basis for mutual understanding. In addition to all these factors that
make for a maximum gap between conquerors and conquered, the latter are
typically at a strong technological disadvantage (otherwise they would not
as easily have been conquered), and this disadvantage readily becomes translated, in the ideology of the conqueror, as proof of inferiority and as a
justification for continued domination.
All these characteristics of the "colonial situation" (Balandier, 1963) make
the colonial form of imperialism an extreme one, not only in terms of brutality of conquest, exploitation and domination, but also in terms of social
distance between masters and subjects, rigidity of ethnic boundaries, bipolarity of living standards and elaboration of self-serving ideologies. Colonialism is imperialism writ large; imperialism without the restraints of
common bonds of history, culture, religion, marriage and blood that often
exist when conquest takes place between neighbors. Colonialism is imperialism set in the concrete of a rigid, castelike system of ethnic relations.
In the last analysis, what make for the special character of the colonial
situation is the perception by the conqueror that he is dealing with totally
unrelated, alien and, therefore, inferior people. Colonials are treated as people totally beyond the pale of kin selection and as complete strangers whose
very humanity is sometimes called into question, but toward whom, in any
case, feelings of sympathy, solidarity and commonness of history and destiny seem ludicrously inappropriate. "They" are simply not like " u s . " Even
the most fundamental appeals to common humanity seem to need qualification in colonial situations. "They," supposedly, do not have the same
needs as " w e " do; "they" feel differently, "they" are, in short, a separate,

86
and inferior, breed—different from "us" in nature. A saying of Andean
Mestizos concerning Indians puts it well; EJ indio es al animal que mas se
parece al hombre. ("The Indian is the animal which most closely resembles
man.") Not unexpectedly, racism is the ideology of colonialism, par excellence, although racism is not confined to colonial situations, nor are all
colonial regimes equally strongly and explicitly racist.
TYPES OF COLONY AND COLONIALISM
At this point, we must clear up a terminological confusion. The terms "colony" and "colonialism" have two very different meanings—one much older
than the other. By far the older meaning of "colony," and one which is still
in common usage, both in ecology and in common parlance, is a group of
organisms that have spread to a new habitat. Thus, we say that a plant
"colonizes" an island. By extension, in reference to humans, a colony has
long meant a branch of an ethny that has "hived off" and established a new
residence, e.g. the German colony in Nebraska or the American colony in
Paris. In these cases, no conquest is implied; merely residence apart from
the parent population in the midst of people from different ethnies.
A colony, in the sense of a political dependency of a "mother country"
(note the kin terminology) acquired by a process of both settlement and
conquest, is a special meaning that became more widespread with the maritime expansion of Europe, starting in the late 15th century, although it is
also used in reference to antiquity (e.g. the Greek colonies of Italy) and the
renaissance (e.g. the Venetian colonies in the Adriatic). Even then, a distinction came to be made between the "colonies of settlement" and "colonies
of exploitation," with the terms "colonialism" being reserved for the system
prevailing in the latter.
"Colonies of settlement" such as the English and French colonies of North
America, Australia and New Zealand were principally nontropical territories with climatic and ecological conditions favorable to European settlement but marginal to their aboriginal populations of hunters and gatherers
and simple horticulturalists. The latter were, therefore, sparse and often
nomadic, and could be easily displaced or exterminated to make room for
European settlers with a more advanced military, medical and agricultural
technology favoring rapid demographic growth and economic development.
Colonies of settlement thus gradually became mere extensions of Europe,
which in time became politically independent of their "mother countries"
but still retained many economic, social and cultural ties with them.
Even before colonies of settlement became politically sovereign, their
European populations were treated quite differently from other "colonials."
White colonials may have chafed at what they considered to be discriminatory taxation, and exclusion from top political positions; they may have
resented being regarded as country bumpkins isolated from the main center
of "high culture." But, however "unfairly" treated, they remained kith and
kin of the home population—cousins in the diaspora, not subjects to be

87
exploited. The relationship between the colonial office at home and settlers
in the colonies always remained fundamentally different from those between
the colonial office and dark-skinned natives. With white colonials, relations
were always of the intraethnic type, and exploitation and domination were
restrained by law, custom, religion and countless civilities. There prevailed,
in fact, a system of extended kin selection that survived even the most
extreme tests of rebellion. The American War of Independence, for instance,
was fought with remarkable civility, chivalry and restraint compared to,
say, the Zulu Wars or the Ashanti Wars. There was much bitterness between
loyalists and rebels, to be sure, but it was the bitterness of family quarrels—the bitterness of a divorce settlement followed by the necessity of
reconciliation because of the common children.
None of these considerations prevailed in the relationship between colonial office and natives, nor indeed between natives and European settlers.
"Colonies of exploitation," as the term indicates, were meant to be exploited.
The principal restraints were those imposed by poverty and lack of resources
of the colony, by difficulties of access, by inefficiency of administration, by
astuteness of natives in evading exactions and, occasionally, by long-range
considerations of depletion of colonial assets. Even long-range self-interest
of the colonizer was not always a guarantee against ruthlessly destructive
plunder, as the history of most Spanish American colonies shows.
Correspondence between local Spanish colonial officials and their superiors in Spain complaining about a gradual decline in annual tribute
payments from Indians stresses one recurrent theme; Se estdn acabando los
indios. ("Indians are being finished off.") Yet, the appalling conditions of
forced labor in the silver and mercury mines, the textile mills and the
plantations, which were emptying vast stretches of territory of their Indian
population, were never substantially ameliorated. Only at the very end of
the Spanish colonial period, in the late 18th century, did the Indian population begin to recover from colonial depredations. The colonial orange
was squeezed dry with little concern about long-range depletion.
The Catholic Church repeatedly tried to intervene, pleading that Indians
too had immortal souls, but to little avail. Indeed, monasteries themselves
became prominent exploiters of Indian labor, under the guise of saving
souls. With or without souls, Indians were clearly not kith and kin, as far
as the Spaniards were concerned. Inhuman treatment was routine, and Indian uprisings were repressed with ruthless ferocity, compared to the rather
genteel fighting that characterized the wars of independence against the
Creoles in the 1810s and early 1820s.

THE ECOLOGICAL, DEMOGRAPHIC AND TECHNOLOGICAL
CONTEXT OF COLONIALISM
Whether a colonial territory becomes a colony of settlement or a colony of
exploitation hinges principally on a set of ecological and technological
conditions. The typical colony of settlement, as far as the expansion of

88
Europe since the 18th century is concerned, has had one salient characteristic: it has been nontropical. From a biased, Eurocentric perspective, the
broad "temperate zone" between the Arctic and the Tropics seems to present
such obvious advantages as to make its desirability self-evident. In fact, the
opposite is true. Man is, by nature, a tropical or subtropical animal. Like
all other primates, the first three or four million years of hominid evolution
took place in a tropical or subtropical environment, and the ability to survive
in colder climates had to await the development of more advanced technologies.
However, several thousand years of cultural and biological adaptation put
the exploding European population at a competitive advantage, relative to
the indigenes, in the nontropical parts of the world. Much of that advantage
was technological. European societies, by the turn of the 16th century, and
increasingly thereafter, were the most advanced in the use of animal traction
and wind and water power, in the development of metallurgy, weaponry
and navigation, and in intense plow agriculture of nontropical lands. Only
China and Japan could have competed with Europe in the early phase of
colonial expansion (up to the 18th century), but, for complex historical
reasons, they did not expand their territories as Europe did. (However, in
China, there was a lot of agricultural colonization of new lands, permitting
rapid population increase.) Admiral Cheng Ho's expeditions in the first four
decades of the 15th century proved that China could have conquered much
of the world then, but it did not (Braudel, 1973). Nor, be it noted, were
China and Japan conquered by Europe. It is certainly no accident that the
only major part of the world that escaped European conquest was much like
Europe in both climate and technological level. That is, it was inhabited by
a densely settled population of advanced, nontropical agriculturalists with
a sophisticated technology. This was a setting in which Europeans were at
little or no competitive advantage until the 19th century.
An advanced technology of production made possible an entire complex
of interrelated developments which, in combination, gave Europe a tremendous competitive edge over much of the rest of the world. In the late
Middle Ages intensive deep-plow agriculture with crop rotation and fertilization combined with increasing use of wind and water power and an
advanced iron metallurgy to create a series of social transformations. These
included a population explosion, a production surplus, a centralization of
power in states of increasing size and complexity, a vast improvement of
military and naval technology, the growth of cities as centers of long-distance trade and handicraft production, in short, the human and material
resources and the technological skills to expand and conquer (Bloch,
1939-1940; Cipolla, 1965; White, 1962).
Culture and technology, extremely important though they were, tell only
part of the story of the colonial expansion of Europe. Biology also played
a role. Specifically, Europeans were biologically adapted to nontropical
climates. In tropical areas, they often were at a biological disadvantage in
relation to better-adapted natives. Skin pigmentation for protection against

89
skin cancer and the gene for sickle-cell anemia conferring some protection
against malaria in heterozygotic carriers are two examples of human genetic
adaptation to the tropics. Until the advent of the late 19th century medicine,
the tropics were, literally, a white man's grave.*
In the Western Hemisphere, however, Europeans had a tremendous advantage. They unwittingly, and sometimes even wittingly, carried with them
bacteriological warfare, being vectors of diseases such as smallpox, influenza
and measles, to which European populations had become largely immune
but against which Amerindian populations were unprotected (McNeill,
1976). A history of human migration and colonization must therefore include an important ecological and epidemiological component.
European settlers, when they emigrated to temperate climates, came biologically and culturally equipped for successful competition against aborigines for whom the habitat was marginal, given their level of technology.
An advanced agricultural society permitting high population densities could
(and did) easily swamp thinly settled nomads who were typically hunters
and gatherers, or primitive agriculturalists. In such environments (e.g. Canada, the United States, Australia, New Zealand, the extreme southern tip
of Africa and the southern half of South America), the European settlers
multiplied through immigration and successful reproduction, while the natives were virtually exterminated through imported disease and warfare or
pushed back to the least-desirable areas. The demographic expansion of
Europeans was doubly easy and rapid in the Western Hemisphere through
the selective impact of epidemic diseases.
Looking at European expansion in ecological terms, the Europeans were
suddenly able, through the development of reliable ocean navigation, to fill
a vast empty niche. Luckily for them, there was a vast area in North America,
and, in the Southern Hemisphere, in Australia, the Southern tip of Africa
and the Southern half of South America, which was very thinly settled by
nomads or seminomads who were either hunters and gatherers, or very
marginal horticulturalists. Equipped with a technology of nontropical, advanced plow agriculture, European settlers could explode demographically
in that favorable habitat. The demographic success story of the French Canadians in the 19th century is a case in point of how reproductively successful a population can be when it suddenly encounters an empty niche.
With relatively little immigration from Europe, the French population of
the Province of Quebec multiplied thirteenfold (from 92,000 in 1771 to 1.2
million in 1871) in the century after British conquest. And it did so in a
situation of complete labor self-sufficiency. It produced its own food, shelter
and other necessities without any slave labor. Even the servant class was
of European stock.

*The bark of a Peruvian tropical tree later called cinchona was chewed as a malaria proventative
since around 1630. but the commercial mass cultivation of a strain of cinchona producing a
medically effective quinine was first successfully accomplished by the Dutch in the East Indies,
in the late 1860s. barely a decade before the European scramble for Africa.

90
The Chinese, Koreans and Japanese would probably have been equally
successful in filling that empty niche, had they crossed the Pacific. Their
ships and navigational techniques in the late 15th century were only slightly
inferior to those of Europe. The Europeans accidentally stumbled into the
empty niche while looking for a new route to Asia, and it was not until the
17th and 18th century that they really began to fill it—and not until the
mid-19th century that the expansion process was virtually completed. By
the 17th century, European naval and firearms technology had vastly outstripped that of the Far East (Cipolla, 1965).

COLONIALISM IN THE TROPICS
In the tropics or subtropics, the story was quite different. There Europeans
were at a biological disadvantage, especially in the Old World tropics where
they were highly susceptible to a wide range of tropical diseases such as
malaria, sleeping sickness and yellow fever, without the advantage of carrying with them diseases capable of devastating native populations. Migration within the Old World had been sufficient to create roughly comparable
levels of immunity to the great epidemic killers that ravaged Amerindians,
mostly influenza, measles and smallpox. In the Old World tropics, Europeans could not rely as much on racially selective bacterial allies as they
could in the New World tropics.
Besides the epidemiological barriers to European settlement in the tropics,
there were also major cultural barriers. By and large, Europeans had an
overwhelming superiority in the means of violence through the possession
of firearms, but this advantage was greatly mitigated by three major factors:
1. The European presence was always demographically precarious. On the
one hand, Europeans had such a high mortality rate in many tropical
areas that their fitness was sharply reduced. In tropical Africa, for instance, even with the great medical advances of the 20th century, the
European population never achieved replacement levels of reproduction.
Europeans were constantly replenished through immigration, and very
few European women successfully reproduced in the African tropics. On
the other hand, many parts of the American, African and Asian tropics
and subtropics were densely settled when Europeans arrived. It was thus
very difficult for Europeans to overcome their position as a small minority, often of less than 1% of the total population.
2. In many parts of the tropics and subtropics, the Europeans encountered
highly organized state societies running into hundreds of thousands or
even millions of members who, therefore, could often put up stiff resistance to European conquest. Europeans overcame part of that disadvantage by relying extensively on native troops equipped with firearms,
but these native auxiliaries often rebelled and the wide distribution of
firearms almost inevitably meant their spread among native societies.
Indeed, in many cases (such as West Africa and New Zealand), it was

91
European trade that introduced large numbers of firearms, sometimes
with devastating consequences to native societies that started using firearms in fighting each other. In any case, Europeans in much of the tropics
were not only vastly outnumbered, they also faced cohesively organized
societies of considerable size, often capable of fielding armies of thousands of disciplined, trained soldiers.
3. The competitive advantage of European production technology was seriously reduced by tropical conditions. The two main forms of colonial
production, mining and plantation agriculture, remained entirely dependent on vast quantities of non-European labor. European agricultural
technology was ill-adapted to tropical conditions, and the main contribution of Europeans in subsistence agriculture was the carrying of food
crops from one part of the tropics to another. Transportation technology
was revolutionalized by European conquest, but the European impact on
basic agricultural production was much less dramatic. By the 20th century, European preventive medicine and hygiene produced a population
explosion, but the main beneficiaries of it in terms of fitness were the
tropical natives, not their colonial masters. As for the ability of Europeans
to survive in the tropics with their own technology and labor, it seems
to have been quite limited.
Attempts at creating self-sufficient European colonies in warm climates
generally failed, at least until the advent of modern medicine in the 20th
century. Costa Rica is the only New World tropical country that is of predominantly European stock. Even in a relatively favorable, quasi-Mediterranean climate, such as that of the Cape Colony at the southern tip of Africa,
the success was only partial. Whites managed to expand demographically
and displace the native Bushman and Hottentot nomads, but within six
years of their initial settlement in 1652, they were importing slave labor
(De Kiewiet, 1941; Marquard, 1962; van den Berghe, 1965).
It might be argued that the availability of native or slave labor saved
Europeans the trouble of trying very hard, but, outside the tropics, European
settlers (who could also have imported and used slave labor) managed to
do quite well. Yet, almost nowhere in the tropics, with the exception of
Costa Rica, did a self-reliant European colony develop. When the aboriginal
population was wiped out, as in the Caribbean Islands, slaves or indentured
labor was imported from other tropical areas. Attempts at using European
labor in the tropics or subtropics (as in Hawaii) were uniformly unsuccessful.
In short, European colonialism in the tropics was characterized by tKe
following:
1. an inability of the European population to reproduce to replacement
levels, much less to expand demographically at the expense of the natives;
2. European political control obtained largely through a superior technology of violence and of transportation;

92
3. complete reliance on the labor of tropical populations, native or imported, for the exploitation natural resources (mining, timber and agriculture).
In the last analysis, European colonialism in the tropics hinged on the
availability of a supply of labor from people acclimatized to work hard in
hot weather. Without such a supply, colonial exploitation was impossible.
The two most desirable properties of labor were cheapness and docility,
each of these being determined in turn by a multiplicity of factors. Nevertheless, certain generalities emerge from the wide variety of local conditions.
Basically, there were two broad types of tropical colonies of exploitation:
colonies in which the bulk of the labor force consisted of natives and colonies relying on an imported slave or indentured labor force.
The first type was most successful where the native population was already sedentary, agricultural and relatively dense at the time of conquest
and, preferably, where it was already a peasantry—i.e. the exploited primary
producers of a stratified, state-organized society. When the Europeans conquered complex native states with an established peasantry, their principal
difficulty was the conquest itself. Once political domination was achieved,
however, the rest was relatively easy, for two basic ingredients necessary
for effective exploitation were already in place:
1. an administrative machinery to collect tribute, organize labor for public
works, and so on;
2. a peasant population with the following attractive qualities:
a. easily controllable by being sedentary and attached to the soil;
b. cheap, since it was abundantly available for the taking, without having
to be bought or transported, and since it fed and reproduced itself;
c. docile, since it was already used to being taxed and exploited by
native rulers and subject to domination by a ruling class; and
d. productive, since it was acclimatized to hard work under local conditions.
Such a situation characterized the highlands of Meso-America and the
Andes, much of North, West and Central Africa and nearly all of tropical
Asia. As I shall show presently, these conditions led to the more or less
independent development of very similar systems of domination, to what
may be considered the prototypical "colonial situation" (Balandier, 1963;
Lugard, 1929; Maunier, 1949).
Slavery (or indenture, the 19th century substitute for chattel slavery) led
to a substantially different type of colonialism to which I shall devote the
next chapter. All the colonies based principally on chattel slavery have a
general family resemblance—long noted by many students of slavery
(Freyre, 1964; Genovese, 1965,1969a, 1974; Patterson, 1967; van den Berghe,
1967). Basically slave colonies developed where there were not enough
natives to supply labor demand, or where the natives were unavailable or

93
unsuitable to the tasks required of them. Only then did the conquerors resort
to the more expensive expedient of importing and buying its colonial labor
force. Slaves not only had to be captured or bought and transported (often
with high risk of mortality and morbidity), but they also had to be fed and
sustained, and they frequently did not reproduce to replacement levels. In
the Western Hemisphere, only in the English colonies of North America,
i.e. outside of the tropical zone, were slaves sufficiently reproductive to
increase their numbers without continued massive importation well into
the 19th century.
Slavery, then, was an expensive solution, and thus a last resort. It was
only developed when natives were unavailable or unsuitable, and that meant
basically where they belonged to nomadic or seminomadic societies of hunters and gatherers, primitive stateless horticulturalists or, occasionally, pastoralists. These modes of production sustained only low densities of
population (often well under one inhabitant per square kilometer), and thus
natives were few to start with. In addition, nomadism meant that such
aborigines as existed were mobile, elusive and difficult to control. They
typically had a vast hinterland into which they could escape labor exploitation.
Even when expeditions were mounted to catch them (as the Portuguese
tried in Brazil, for example), they so frequently escaped, committed suicide
or died of disease that these attempts soon proved abortive. Furthermore,
nomads typically are unused to being exploited since their own societies
are often relatively egalitarian, ill-adapted to steady hard labor and lacking
in the skills useful to colonial exploiters (as cultivators, for example). They
are, in short, lovers of freedom and make very poor colonial underlings. Not
unexpectedly, they are regarded by their conquerors as lazy, shiftless and
unreliable, as an obstacle to development and as a nuisance to be displaced.
The dictum of the American frontier, fondly quoted by President Theodore
Roosevelt, expressed that attitude succinctly: "The only good Indian is a
dead Indian."
CLASSICAL COLONIALISM
What we may call classical colonialism—the exploitation of native, tropical
populations by small European minorities—developed principally in three
areas of the world: first in tropical America, especially in the Spanish colonies and principally in the densely settled highlands of Meso-America and
the Andes; then in Asia, from India to Indochina and Indonesia, and lastly
in Africa where it only .came in the late 19th century but quickly engulfed
nearly all of the continent.
The historians, accustomed to steeping themselves in the detailed peculiarities of a given place and time, and to stressing the uniqueness of each,
may shudder at the thought of lumping together 16th-century Peru and 20thcentury Nigeria, 18th-century India and 19th-century Angola. Much has
been written about the differences in colonial policy between the main

94
colonial powers. The Latin Catholic colonizers (Portugal, Spain and France)
were, on the whole, more racially tolerant, more assimilationist and more
rigidly centralized than their Protestant rivals (England, Holland and Germany) who were more openly racist, made fewer attempts to impose their
language and culture, and tended to rule more pragmatically, according to
local conditions.
Native cultures ranged from complex, stratified, imperial structures like
those of the Moghuls in India and the Inca in the Andes, to village-level,
stateless, egalitarian societies like the Ibo of Nigeria, and the Masai and
Kikuyu of Kenya—with chieftaincies and states of all sizes and degrees of
complexity in between. Climatic conditions ranged from relatively benign
for Europeans, for example in the Kenya highlands and in the high-altitude
regions of Mexico, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Bolivia, to lethal—until
the use of quinine against malaria—such as the coast of West Africa. (Kwameh Nkrumah, leader of the Ghana independence movement, jokingly suggested that Africans should erect a monument to the anopheles mosquito,
the vector of malaria.)
These differences, and many more besides, help explain differences
among colonial territories, and, of course, a detailed understanding of any
one of them presupposes an intimate familiarity with its history, its indigenous cultures, its ecological conditions, its economic base and the policies
of the colonial power. Nevertheless, underlying these considerable differences from colony to colony, certain uniformities can be detected that justify
speaking of classical colonialism as an ideal type. Our concern here is not
with explaining the details and the idiosyncracies, but with discerning the
commonalities.
Since the purpose, often explicit, of keeping a colony was to exploit it,
the relative success of the enterprise hinged on securing and controlling
native labor (for without it exploitation was well-nigh impossible, or, at any
rate, much costlier) and keeping the cost of that control as low as possible.
The basic solutions to this twofold problem of cost of administration and
control of natives were few and simple and, therefore, independently reinvented time and again. The basic set of colonial equations was
European = dear
Native = cheap
To it, the entire political, economic and social structure of the colonial
territory could be reduced. It followed from it that successful administration
of a tropical dependency had to be done with as few Europeans as possible.
Europeans were expensive to bring in and to maintain at the princely level
to which they quickly became accustomed in their colonies; they were
notoriously susceptible to disease and alcoholism, and they were allergic
to hard work. Therefore, the fewer the Europeans, the more cheaply the
territory could be managed. Europeans, therefore, must be saved strictly for
key positions of command and supervision that could not be entrusted to

95
natives and retained at a minimum of posts requiring technical expertise
and for which natives could not readily be trained. The classical colony was
run with a skeletal crew of highly paid, highly privileged and often highly
skilled Europeans who invariably constituted a more or less closed ruling
caste.
European colonials in the tropics adopted a palatial lifestyle, far superior
to what most of them could have hoped to have achieved back home. Typically lodged and furnished at government or company expense in manicured, segregated, gilded ghettoes, Europeans were exempt from all manual
labor. The typical colonial family had a retinue of at least six servants: a

cook and his assistant, one or two "house boys," a gardener, alaundryman,

sometimes a coachman or chauffeur. Their social life was entirely limited
to their own kind. Contacts with the natives were limited to utilitarian ends
and almost solely of a hierarchical, master-servant type. Intermarriage was
almost totally nonexistent, although concubinage between white men and
native women was frequent, though sometimes semiclandestine. Native concubines were excluded from European social life and so were in most cases
their "half-breed" children, although in the more assimilationist colonies

of Spain and Portugal mulattoes and mestizos gradually infiltrated the dom-

inant group. Elsewhere they often constituted a group of intermediate status,

as on many West Indian islands (Lowenthal, 1972).
The extent to which notions of European superiority were based on race
or on culture varied somewhat from country to country. British, Belgian,
Dutch and German colonizers tended to be more openly racist, ascribing the
supposed shortcomings of the natives to innate, genetic disabilities. The
Latin colonizers (Spain, Portugal and France), however, were openly ethnocentric and automatically assumed that their language, religion and culture were superior to those of the natives, but they tended to grant the latter
a greater ability to acquire these superior attributes. That is perhaps why,
being less racist, the Latin colonizers were often more intolerant of native
culture and of native failure to embrace their civilization with alacrity. The
English or Dutch, who believed that the African was intellectually incapable
of turning into a European, could then afford to be condescendingly tolerant
of indigenous culture as best adapted to the supposedly inferior mentality
of the native. The Frenchman or Spaniard, who granted the Indian or the
African the capability of becoming a European and a Christian, was tempted
to see any failure on the part of the native to become an evolue (as the
French colonial terminology described Europeanized Africans) as an act of
defiance or perversity.
Whatever the detailed modalities of European colonial ideology, social
relations across the color line were subject to a rigid etiquette of dominance
and subordination—rationalized through a complex ideology legitimating
European rule. In the early Spanish-Portuguese phase of colonial expansion,
the legitimation was religions: Europeans went out to save benighted heathens from eternal damnation. Later, the ideology increasingly took a secularized form: Europe had a "civilizing mission" to lead primitive peoples

96
out of their savagery. In either case, the model of social relations was paternalistic. Natives were considered to be irresponsible, incapable of ruling
themselves, backward grown-up children who could not fend for themselves. It was therefore in their own best interests to be ruled by Europeans
who had a sacred trust to lead them to a higher level of spiritual and material
existence. The latest incarnations of that paternalistic ideology, revamped
to suit the rhetoric of political independence, was the U.S. Peace Corps, the
French Cooperation and the British Volunteer Service Overseas. According
to Albert Schweitzer, the African was his brother, but his younger brother.
What political and economic reality did this fagade of benevolent despotism hide? Basically, the system of domination was designed to achieve
as cheaply as possible the measure of control necessary to produce optimum
exploitation. Where the main resource was land, as was the case outside
the tropics, the indigenes were simply swept aside, giving rise to colonies
of settlement.
Where trade was the object and where goods could be obtained profitably,
cheaply and safely without territorial conquest, Europeans confined themselves to small, fortified, coastal settlements defended more against each
other than against their native neighbors and partners in trade. Thus, for
well over three centuries, Europeans and West Africans collaborated in a
thriving slave trade with only minimal territorial encroachments (Davidson,
1961). It was too risky and costly for Europeans to pursue directly themselves
a commodity that Africans vied with each other to produce at low cost. The
same was true of trade in spices and other luxury goods in the Orient. In
fact, the more "progressive" capitalist European powers launched their colonial adventures as chartered semiprivate trading companies. The Dutch,
French and British all founded state-sponsored but privately owned East
and West Indian companies which, during much of the 17th and 18th centuries, combined the functions of an import-export firm, a shipping line
and a colonial government.
Often these chartered trading companies grew into colonial empires and
were eventually taken over by the government of their respective countries.
This was the case, for instance, with the British in India, the Dutch in
Indonesia and, later, the British in Nigeria. The political take-over of large
tropical territories was often initially resisted by European governments
who feared the trouble and expense of maintaining a land empire. The
British in South Africa, for example, always sought to contain the expanding
European settlers (who admittedly were Boers rather than British, and thus
colonial rivals), and to minimize its administrative responsibilities over the
hinterland, until the discovery of diamonds in 1867 and of gold in 1886
(De Kiewiet, 1941).
Therefore, Europeans only conquered colonial territories when they
thought it would pay to do so, and when health conditions gave a fair chance
of survival. In the case of much of South and Central America, these conditions were met soon after initial contact at the turn of the 16th century.
The Spanish and Portuguese intended to plunder, not to trade, and climatic

97
and epidemiological conditions in the American tropics were considerably
more favorable to the Europeans than in Africa or even Asia. Altitude put
vast stretches of the American tropics well beyond the reach of the great
tropical killer diseases (malaria, yellow fever, sleeping sickness and bilharzia) and imported European diseases (measles, plague, smallpox and
influenza) conveniently decimated native populations already demoralized
by the extraordinarily swift and brutal conquest of Cortes in Mexico and
Pizarro in Peru. Indeed, some epidemics even spread from the Caribbean
to the Andes so swiftly that they preceded Pizarro by a few years (McNeill,
1976).
In the Asian and African tropics, conditions were far less favorable for
conquest. Native societies were often large and powerful, and indigenes
(except on isolated Pacific islands) were often as immune as their wouldbe conquerors to European-borne diseases. Conversely, the local climate
was often dangerous and debilitating to Europeans who were thus scarcely
in a position to mount military expeditions into the interior. They were
only safe, both militarily and healthwise, in their coastal forts and on their
ships (Cipolla, 1965; Davidson, 1961). Finally, goods could often be obtained
cheaply through peaceful trade.
Over time, however, improvements in military and naval technology
steadily increased the power disparity between Europe and the rest of the
world in the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries, and medical breakthroughs, such
as the use of quinine as a malaria preventative and curative drug, made it
increasingly tempting for the Europeans to eliminate the native middleman
in trade and to take over themselves.

CONTROL OF NATIVE LABOR
European expansion in the tropics was not only a question of controlling
trade at the source, however. Of greater significance, it increasingly became
a question of organizing production of raw materials through the control of
native labor. By the 17th century the more dynamic regions of Europe,
especially England, France and the Low Countries, were experiencing a
population boom made possible by economic and technological development, and they became more and more voracious in their demand for tropical
products, both raw materials like hardwoods for ships and windmill gears,
and luxury goods like gold, silver, spices and sugar. Capitalism thrived and,
by the late 18th century, the Industrial Revolution was on, with its multiple
needs for a vast range of new raw materials (iron, copper, cotton, jute and
oil to lubricate the machinery). Rising standards of living also greatly increased the demand for tropical luxuries: coffee, tea, cocoa and cloves.
Furthermore, the vast population of the tropical colonies increasingly became not only a source of labor to produce raw materials but consumers of
finished products made in Europe.
It is possibly an overstatement to claim that industrial capitalism would
not have been possible without colonial exploitation, but it certainly thrived

98
on it. After the mad scramble for Africa in the last quarter of the 19th
century, virtually the whole surface of the earth, except for China, Japan,
Korea, Thailand, Ethiopia and a handful of other isolated states, had come
under European hegemony and had become incorporated into what Wallerstein (1974) has called the "capitalist world system." Western Europe
expanded overseas, and Russia expanded over its vast Siberian hinterland.
The whole world was cut up into European spheres of influence and markets.
Many of the colonial raw materials required in Europe, whether minerals
or plantation crops, demanded an organization of production which the
natives, left to themselves, were unwilling to provide. It is hard to convince
a tropical peasant, or indeed anyone, to work ten or 12 hours a day cutting
sugar cane or digging gold. Unless forced to do so, they naturally preferred
not to do monotonous, back-breaking, dangerous and unhealthy work for
long hours, for low wages, under a blazing sun and while badly fed. This
unwillingness earned them the reputation for "laziness" with their colonial
masters, who themselves shunned all manual labor in the tropics. In short,
the running of plantations and mines required European supervision—indeed,
coercion.
This is how classical colonies of exploitation developed. The problem
was to maximize output while minimizing overhead. Since output required
supervised and coerced native labor, the overhead was mostly of a political
nature. European colonial governments had to create and maintain political
conditions such as to produce a reliable, steady supply of docile and cheap
labor. And they had to do it at minimum cost. This meant, first of all, using
as few Europeans and as many natives as possible. The more natives could
be used as instruments of their own oppression, the less expensive the
colonial operation became. Specifically, this meant mostly two things: the
use of native troops under European officers as ultimate enforcers of colonial
"law and order," and a system of indirect rule through native chiefs.
Both of these techniques are worth some attention since they had profound
implications for ethnic relations in the colonies. The use of native troops
in the control of native populations is almost universal in the European
colonial experience. The only notable exception is South Africa, a subtropical territory, half colony of settlement and half colony of exploitation,
where the European settlers were numerous enough to provide the armed
forces, and where they jealously (and successfully) guarded their monopoly
of firearms. Where Europeans were few (i.e. nearly everywhere in the tropics,
especially in Asia and Africa), they could only provide the officer ranks of
the armed forces—typically less than 5% of the men under arms.
Colonial armies did not need to be the most efficient and technically
competent. Basically, colonial troops were made up of quickly trained,
cheaply equipped infantrymen whose main skill was an ability to shoot
down unarmed civilians and to burn and loot villages. To be sure, colonial
troops were occasionally used to repress well-organized insurrections (including sometimes mutinous, armed units of the colonial army), and even
to fight their masters' wars on different continents. Their main task, how-

99
ever, was to prevent local populations from rebelling by their intimidating
presence, to guard European installations and prisons and to repress revolts.
There were inherent dangers in arming native troops, and mutinies were
common—occasionally quite serious, as, for example, the Great Indian Mutiny of 1857 (Mason, 1974). However, these dangers could be greatly mitigated through a judicious policy of dividing and ruling by playing up ethnic
antagonisms within the native population. The favorite formula was to form
ethnically homogeneous units at the company, batallion or even regimental
level to create esprit de corps within the unit, and rivalry and competition
between units. Units, always under European officers (and sometimes even
noncommissioned officers), would then be posted far away from their home
territory—preferably among their traditional enemies. If a unit mutinied, it
could not count on the sympathy of the local population, and units from
different ethnic groups could be relied upon to wipe them out.
Ethnic stereotypes also played a role in the recruitment of native troops,
who were generally picked from what the British called "martial races."
This often meant ethnies with a record of military success in precolonial
days and therefore especially hated by their neighbors. The loyalty of native
troops was also often fostered by granting them inexpensive privileges, such
as good food and quarters, a colorful uniform, a small but regular income
in cash and the implicit right to molest, pilfer and exploit in a small way
the local population, thereby reinforcing the already existing antagonisms.

INDIRECT RULE
The term "indirect rule" is generally attributed to Lord Frederick Lugard,
who served as British governor of Northern Nigeria at the turn of the 20th
century, and who wrote extensively on the subject of how best to rule natives
(Lugard, 1929). The practice, however, long antedates him and is found not
only in all European colonial empires, but also in other imperial systems
such as the Ottoman and the Moghul Empires. The Nazis even tried to create
an indirect rule system by appointing a Judenrat (Jewish Council) in the
Polish ghettoes, while implementing the Final Solution. Even under such
extreme circumstances, the system worked to a remarkable extent.
The reason for the popularity of indirect rule and its independent reinvention by many colonial rulers is that it constitutes the simplest and cheapest way of running a colony. Stripped of its fancy rhetoric of noblesse
oblige, civilizing mission and similar ideological claptrap, indirect rule boils
down to this: if the native society you conquered already had a ruling class,
strip it of ultimate power and keep it under close watch, but rule through
it; that is, let it do the dirty work of tax collection, corvee labor gathering,
police, and so on, for you. In exchange for being your puppet, allow the
native ruler to keep the trappings of power and those privileges that do not
interfere with your ultimate control. So as not to antagonize the people
needlessly, do not disturb local law, custom and religion, especially as these
generally tend to support established authority, allowing the maximum de-

100
gree of local autonomy compatible with your interests as the colonizer. In
short, rule through native chiefs; give them a free hand so long as they
behave; and do not gratuitously interfere with local customs.
Indirect rule had two drawbacks, however. It was easy enough to implement where a centralized state had existed before, and where, therefore, an
entire administrative structure was already in place. This explained Lugard's
success in Northern Nigeria, which for several centuries had consisted of
large feudal states and had been welded into an empire by the Fulani a
century before the British conquest. The latter was merely the latest episode
in a long history of conquest by various ethnic groups. Lugard merely put
a label on a solution that obviously imposed itself. Where the conquered
people belonged to a stateless, classless society, however, there was no
obvious political structure to use, and indirect rule had to be created from
scratch. Native chiefs, if they did not exist, had to be created; but this was
often more easily said than done, since they would not be obeyed. Indeed,
sometimes natives played jokes on the colonial administration, pretending
that a very low-status person or the village simpleton, was their chief, making him and the colonial administration the butt of ridicule. In Southeastern
Nigeria, for instance, inhabited by stateless, village-level, egalitarian societies like the Ibo, the British policy of indirect rule was never effectively
implemented.
The second limitation of indirect rule is that its effectiveness rests on a
give-and-take basis and thus puts limits on what the conqueror can do. The
role of native ruler in a system of indirect rule is a very delicate one. If he
becomes entirely the stooge of the colonial regime, he looses all credibility
and legitimacy with his people and thus ceases to be effective, for his actions
will be resisted and sabotaged, and his orders ignored. If, however, he sides
with his people and resists too openly the colonial administration, he is
likely to be replaced by someone more pliable. The native chief is thus
perpetually performing a balancing act between the colonial rulers and his
subjects. The former must see him as a useful collaborator; the latter as a
buffer and protector against "excessive" exploitation. That posture, in turn,
can only be maintained if the colonial power is content with the status quo
and does not seek to alter radically the system of production and to intensify
the exploitation. In short, indirect rule is ideal in state-organized societies
where the colonial power is content to be only moderately exploitative and
to leave the status quo largely undisturbed.
The extent to which indirect rule was applied varied considerably. The
system was most consciously developed by the British in India, Burma,
Nigeria, the Sudan, and by the Dutch in Indonesia. The Spaniards and
Portuguese, who were determined to transform and convert to Christianity
the societies they conquered and to exploit them to the maximum with little
regard even for the life of the Indian labor necessary to the entire colonial
enterprise, used much more direct methods of rule. Even the Spaniards,
however, used Indian caciques or curacas (chiefs) when they found it convenient to do so, granted them special privileges and went to the trouble
of educating them in Spanish and Catholic ways in special schools. The

101
French, too, who were supposedly more assimilationist than the British in
their colonial policies and more centralist in their administration, instituted,
in fact, indirect rule systems in Morocco, the Western Sudan and Indochina.
Colonial theories diverged more than colonial practices. Even the Jesuitical dogmatists and the Cartesian apologists of the mission civilisatrice
were driven to expediency in practice. Conversely, the British pragmatists
erected their sensibly flexible practices into the pseudotheory of indirect
rule. In actual fact, every colonial power was trying to run its empire on a
shoe-string budget. That, inevitably, meant letting the natives become partners in their own subjugation, at the very least at the local village level and
sometimes at all levels but the highest. The more indirect rule, the cheaper
the administration, and the more invisible the foreign conqueror. The native
chief was at once a useful auxiliary, an alibi for failure and a scapegoat for
the hostility of the natives. Colonialism thus exploited not only preexisting
ethnic rivalries but also such class conflicts as existed in precolonial societies.
The simple schema of colonial rule sketched above was often complicated
by the presence of groups other than colonial rulers and native subjects—and
by conflicts of interest within the colonial elite itself. Sometimes, two European ethnies competed for colonial control over a native population—as
happened in the old triangular Boer-British-Bantu conflict in South Africa
(Marquard, 1962; van den Berghe, 1965). Sometimes different sectors of the
colonizer population had divergent interests. Conflicts between church and
state frequently came to the fore in the Spanish and Portuguese colonies.
All these complications and local differences notwithstanding, the political structure of classical colonialism was both remarkably simple and remarkably similar in its essentials from country to country and from period
to period. So was the rigidly hierarchical system of ethnic relations that
flowed from that political structure. We now examine the colonial system
of production that was made possible by this social and political order.

THE COLONIAL SYSTEM OF PRODUCTION
All colonial economies were premised on the same conception of their
function. They were seen as part of an integrated whole that included the
more developed economy of the "mother country" or metropole, the needs
of which they were meant to serve. Colonies existed to produce raw materials
(timber, minerals, cotton, jute and oil) for European industry and agricultural
commodities (many of them luxury items such as tobacco, sugar, rum, coffee,
tea, cocoa and spices) for European consumption. They also served as a
market for cheap European manufactured goods.
Two cardinal economic policies followed logically from this conception.
One was an attempted monopolization by the mStropole of all trade with
its own colonies, to the exclusion of rival colonial powers. The other was
the deliberate fostering of economic dependency of the colony on the
m^tropole.
As concerns the monopolization of trade between colony and metropole,

102
Great Britain was the exception. Starting in the late 18th century, and increasingly in the 19th, Britain became the champion of free trade; but it was
in its interests to do so. Indeed, by then, Britain had become the first shipping
nation in the world, the leading industrial economy, the supreme naval
power and the largest colonial country. In effect, the advocacy of free trade
by Britain was little more than a disguised request for free commercial access
to the whole world, including, of course, its rivals' colonies. Some of the
weaker colonial powers, such as Belgium, had no option but to accept the
"opening" of its colonies to free trade, but most resisted strenuously.
The fostering of economic dependence of the colony on the metropole
meant principally the prevention of self-sufficiency. This could be achieved
negatively by discouraging the development in the colonies of industries
that would compete with home industries. In the 19th century, for example,
Britain, despite her advocacy of free trade for other countries, was concerned
with Indian competition for the British textile industry, trying everything
to stifle it. Positively, economic dependency of the colony was fostered
through highly specialized development of a few products for export. In the
aggregate, the colonial world produced a wide range of goods, but the monoculture of cash crops often prevailed in individual colonies: sugar and its
by-products in the Caribbean, cocoa in the Gold Coast (now Ghana), groundnuts in Senegal, sisal in Tanganyika (now Tanzania), and so on. Monoculture
meant extreme dependence since the crop in question was rarely a basic
subsistence crop and was scarcely ever consumed locally in significant
amounts. The French, for example, produced wine in Algeria, a Muslim
country where religion forbids alcoholic beverages. After nearly a quarter

century of "independence," Ghana, the world's leading producer of cocoa,

still imports most of the little chocolate it consumes from Britain!
Not only were colonial cash crops not consumed locally, but they also
took away much land from subsistence agriculture, thereby leading oftentimes to a decline in the native standard of living and a deterioration in the
quality of the diet. High-yield, low-quality root crops such as manioc and
yams, for instance, were substituted for more varied and protein-richer cereal and bean crops. In extreme cases, such as in the West Indies, food had
to be massively imported because nearly all available arable land was in
sugar cane. Dependency thus generally meant impoverishment as well. Paradoxically, the more "developed" a colony was in terms of export productivity, the worse the diet of its population. Black South Africans, for
instance, have one of the highest incidences of kwashiokor—a nutritional
disease caused by a starchy diet—even though their country is by far the
most highly developed industrial power on the African continent, with one
of the continent's highest per capita income.
An additional source of dependence of colonial economies was that the
few commodities, whether mineral or agricultural, in which they specialized
were highly susceptible to extraordinary price fluctuations on the world
market or, alternatively, were produced under conditions where the colonial
power artificially imposed by force a very low price. Most of the economic

103
imbalance and dependence created during the colonial period still adversely
affects Third World countries today. This continued economic dependence
of formally independent countries on the capitalist (and to some extent on
the socialist) countries is now referred to as "neocolonialism."

THE CONTROL OF COLONIAL LABOR
Within the colony the detailed modalities of the system of production varied
according to local conditions and to the commodity to be produced. Mining
generally required large-scale organization with a large, reliable, disciplined
but fairly unskilled labor force. Some crops, such as cocoa, could be efficiently produced by small independent farmers. Others, such as sugarcane,
which required factories for immediate processing, were most practicable
under a large plantation system. Each commodity favored a particular system
of production. Nevertheless, there were a number of commonalities in the
internal organization of colonial economies.
The key factor, of course, was the control of labor. The first problem to
be solved was to create a supply of labor. Initially, lack of labor supply often
presented a serious obstacle to exploitation. Self-sufficient subsistence peasants with only minimal exposure to a market economy and to its artificially
created needs for manufactured products could not easily be convinced to
work long hours for low wages under strenuous, dangerous, unpleasant
conditions that typically took them away from home and family for long
periods of time and exposed them to accidents and diseases.
However, the problem of labor supply was easily solved through the
simple device of the head tax. Every adult man in the colony was forced to
pay an annual tax in cash: the alternative was often a specified term at
forced labor—in effect a labor tax in lieu of cash. Since the main ready
source of cash in still largely unmonetized colonial economies was working
for Europeans, the imposition of a head tax was a simple way of instantaneously creating a labor supply where none or little existed before. The only
requirement was a system of coercion capable of collecting the tax or, alternatively, imprisoning the evader and supplying him as forced laborer to
his colonial employer. Even a highly industrial economy like South Africa
still relies on the simple device of the head tax (imposed only on blacks
and misleadingly called "poll tax," even though blacks are disenfranchised)
to create a steady supply of cheap labor (Horwitz, 1967; van den Berghe,
1965).
Once labor supply was initiated by taxation, it usually became self-perpetuating. Natives having been exposed to a market economy quickly developed a desire for the manufactured goods it produced, which entailed
more and more wage work. As more and more able-bodied men entered the
"modern" sector of the colonial economy, the "subsistence" sector declined
in relative and sometimes in absolute importance. Labor supply could also
be enhanced by simply dispossessing the natives of their land to "open u p "
the area for large European-controlled ranches, haciendas and plantations.

104
Land dispossession, the development of nonfood cash crops and manpower
shortage in the subsistence sector could quickly reduce the latter to subsubsistence, transforming the able-bodied men into permanent serfs or wage
workers attached to European plantations and mines.
Having secured a supply of labor through the more or less direct use of
coercion, colonial governments and private employers next faced the problems of ensuring that native labor would remain cheap, docile and reliable.
Four basic systems of labor exploitation were developed to these ends.
Naturally, there were many local variations, and sometimes a single colony
simultaneously adopted features of more than one system or gradually
evolved from one type of labor to another; nevertheless, there are four discernible patterns, each with its own features. In ascending order of severity,
they were (1) the quota system, (2) the migrant labor system, (3) the hacienda
system and (4) chattel slavery. The last type was so extreme and had so
many unique features that I shall reserve Chapter 6 to discuss it. Here, I
shall confine myself to a brief description of each of the other three types.
The Quota System
The quota system was, on the whole, the least ruthless, largely because it
was instituted mostly in territories, such as West and Central Africa, where
Europeans were fewest and where their control was most tenuous. Natives
were induced, through various blends of coercion and persuasion to cultivate certain crops or to collect certain wild products (e.g. rubber and
timber) and to furnish fixed quantities of it for a fixed price under some
kind of quota system: so much per man or so much per village. Initially,
ruthless terror was sometimes used to fill these quotas. The Belgians, for
example, in the early days of the "Congo Free State" (another quaint misnomer), liberally cut off the hands of quota delinquents as a production
incentive. Naturally such extreme methods were counterproductive and
typically did not last long.
More liberal versions of this method of induced production of cash crops
were used by the French and the British in West Africa. Production of cocoa,
coffee or groundnuts was left to individual small farmers, but the government would act as a monopsony, i.e. it would monopolize the purchase and
marketing of the produce, impose arbitrary (and low) prices and often collect
an excise tax on production in addition. Sometimes the price was just high
enough to be a production incentive by itself. Failing that, colonial governments often forcibly imposed the cultivation of cash crops on reluctant
villagers (sometimes with ecologically catastrophic results).
By and large, however, the quota system was the mildest form of exploitation, insofar as the worker retained some control of production (if not of
marketing), worked more or less at his own pace and generally could stay
at home among his family and friends. From the perspective of the colonial
masters, the system was suboptional and was only introduced where they
lacked the means to impose a more stringent form of exploitation.

105

The Migrant Labor System
The migrant labor system marks a clear shift in the level of intensity of labor
exploitation. Practiced widely in Africa, Asia and increasingly in postcolonial Latin America, it is based on contract wage labor. A worker obligates
himself for a specified period of time for a specified wage (often plus rations
and a few trade goods such as a blanket or a cooking pot, given as an initial
incentive to sign up). The duration of the contract varies but is typically
fairly short (a few months). Not only are wages low but so is overhead for
the employer, for the worker comes alone, leaving his family at home and
is, of course, strictly prevented from organizing to improve his work conditions. The labor force is rotated frequently, thereby preventing the worker
from striking any roots and making any demands.
Control of the work force is easy since the worker is typically housed in
barracklike camps provided by the employer and under the control of company police. Sometimes, workers are locked up at night; they are generally
cut off from the surrounding society (where the workers are often strangers),
and they are utterly dependent on the employer for food, supplies (in company stores) and medical care (if any). For the duration of the contract, in
short, the worker surrenders nearly all his freedom and, except for the fact
that his obligation is for a limited time and that he is paid wages, the system
is not all that different from slavery. Indeed physical conditions are sometimes worse than under slavery, since the employer has less of an incentive
to keep him healthy.
For all its numerous advantages, the migratory labor system has one drawback: because of rapid turnover, it is unsuited for any operation requiring
highly skilled labor. Plantations and mines, however, require mostly unskilled workers who can be trained in hours or at most days, and agriculture
and mining are the main employers of migratory labor. The few skilled
workers needed can, of course, be paid and treated better; in some cases,
Europeans are hired for the purpose, especially in colonies like Algeria and
South Africa where whites are (or were) numerous enough (10 and 17%,
respectively, of the total population) to provide much of the artisan class.
Elsewhere (as was the case in the copper mines of the Belgian Congo) the
policy was to stabilize part of the African labor force by offering family
housing to skilled workers.
A key prerequisite for the operation of a migrant labor system is the
existence of a rural hinterland from which the workers are drawn, to which
they return between contract periods and where the remainder of the population lives. In many parts of the colonial world, virtually the entire country
is a vast labor reservoir. In some of the more complex systems of labor
migration, entire territories serve as labor reservoirs for more "advanced"
ones, e.g. Upper Volta for Ghana and the Ivory Coast, or Malawi and Mozambique for South Africa. Migrant labor systems incorporate vast regions
into a single complex economic system.
The largest such system on the African continent is the one created by

106
the vast industrial complex of South Africa. It was initiated a little over a
century ago with the development of diamond and gold mining. It still exists
there, virtually unchanged since its inception, and there it has achieved its
ultimate perfection as a system of rational exploitation and control of colonial labor. A more detailed analysis of South Africa will be reserved for
Chapter 8, but a word must be said here about the "native reserve system,"
as it represents the ultimate impoverishment of the rural hinterland necessary to a migrant labor system.
Where this process of land dispossession was extensive, as in South Africa, the Kenya Highlands, and other areas attractive to European enterprise,
the remaining land, often the poorest, was declared to be "native reserves,"
a kind of rural slum, often incapable of supporting its population. Ablebodied men were forced to work in the European sector for wages to support
their families, and the native reserve became a vast holding pen for reproductive women, children and old people past their economic usefulness.
The native reserve then had a double advantage: it was poor enough to force
the economically productive to work in the European sector; at the same
time, it raised just enough food to keep women reproductive and to relieve
the European employers of the burden of feeding their workers' dependents.
The native reserve was thus literally a labor reservoir from which workers
came and to which surplus laborers could return. It was also a labor nursery,
the breeding ground for the next generation of cheap laborers. Finally, it
was a convenient dumping ground for the unfit, thereby further contributing
to the cheapness of labor by reducing the overhead of providing accommodations and feeding the nonproductive population.
The Hacienda System
The hacienda system was most characteristic in Spanish America, hence its
name, and in many countries such as Guatemala, Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia
it still exists or was only recently abolished through land reform. The hacienda shares many characteristics with the slave plantation: it is a little
self-contained feudal world in which masters and servants live in an intimate, stable, life-long but highly unequal relationship. In a sense, a hacienda
is like a slave plantation run with indigenes who did not have to be bought
and brought in because they were already there.
A number of circumstances, besides nominal, legal freedom, made the lot
of the hacienda serf considerably less abject than that of the plantation slave,
however. The hacienda serf belonged to an established community of kinsmen, in-laws and friends; he was generally given a plot of land to cultivate
for his own use and often owned some livestock; usually about half his time
was his own; he frequently had the theoretical right to leave (even though
he often had no other place to go, except another hacienda); finally, the
power of the owner was often contrained by custom or limited by the fact
that he was often an absentee who preferred to live in town.
The Spanish hacienda system evolved over time. It began as a grant of

107
the crown {encomienda) to meritorious conquistadores. The grantees initially did not own the land nor were their privileges hereditary; they merely
had the right to collect tribute (and keep part of it for themselves) from the
Indian population settled on the land, in exchange for converting them to
Christianity and making them faithful subjects of the king. Over time, these
grants became increasingly hereditary, and Spanish settlers claimed more
and more legal ownership of the land. The peasants living on these estates
gradually became serfs—much as the peasants of Medieval Europe.
The typical arrangement was one of "labor tenancy." In exchange for labor
furnished by the male head of the peasant family, he and his family were
entitled to live on the estate, to cultivate a plot of arable land for his own
use and to pasture a specified number of livestock on hacienda land. Detailed
conditions such as a number of days of service, size of individual plots and
number of animals permitted varied greatly, but the general arrangement
was much the same and so was the paternalistic system of ethnic relations
prevailing between masters and serfs.
The hacienda was like a feudal fief: a little self-contained, self-sufficient
world, where generation after generation of peasants were born, lived and
died in the shadow of the "big house" and its dependencies (chapel, cemetery, storerooms, stables and so on). The owners were often absentees
represented by a caretaker, but even then the model of ethnic relations was
one of paternalism. This was symbolized by the fact that the owner was
often the godfather of most of his serfs. Some masters were relatively humane
and imbued with a spirit of condescending benevolence while others were
ruthlessly exploitative.
The hacienda system was less rationally exploitative than the migrant
labor system, and was often economically inefficient and archaic. However,
the serf was continuously under the control of his master—a control from
which there often was no escape since the serf's only home was the hacienda.
Haciendas were owned incidentally not only by private individuals but also
by the Catholic Church and its various religious orders. The typical Indian
mission was often a hacienda. Some of these mission stations, such as the
vast estates of the Jesuits in Paraguay and Brazil, became in fact little selfcontained theocracies within the larger Spanish and Portuguese empires.
This crude typology of colonial systems of labor exploitation is little more
than a gross way of putting some order into complex reality. In fact, systems
of colonial exploitation often overlapped and shaded off into one another.
For example, the "indenture system," whereby East Indian contract laborers
were imported for five-year terms into British colonies (often to replace
African slaves after Abolition in 1834), combined features of the slave plantation for which it was a substitute form of labor and of the migrant labor
system described above. It was originally conceived as a kind of long-term,
long-distance (intercontinental) migrant labor system, but it typically gave
rise to permanent populations in the "host countries," largely because it
permitted the immigration of women. Repatriation to a desperately poor
home country was not an attractive prospect to the workers after completion

108
of indenture, so most stayed in Fiji, Trinidad, Guiana, Kenya, South Africa,
Mauritius and so on—often to become "middleman minorities."
CONCLUSION: COLONIAL RACE AND ETHNIC RELATIONS
Of course, the extreme forms of exploitation and domination described in
this chapter led to rigidly hierarchical ethnic relations. The fundamental
social premise underlying the colonial society was that rulers and subjects
are so different in physical appearance and in culture as to share virtually
nothing. Racism was often invoked to begrudge them even humanity. Macaque (Rhesus monkey), for example, was a favorite epithet of Belgian colonials in referring to Africans. Even when common humanity was conceded,
it was immediately qualified. The natives had a primitive mentality; it would
take them thousands of years to reach the European level of civilization;
they did not feel like Europeans (and, therefore, could be mistreated); their
needs were less (and, therefore, low wages were quite adequate), and so on.
The whole of colonial society was suffused by a double standard of justice,
ethics, behavior, pay and privilege. To be European meant automatic inclusion in the ruling caste, automatic enjoyment of an extremely high standard
of living and automatic entitlement to a privileged legal and political status.
To be a native meant political disenfranchisement, legal treatment as an
incompetent minor subject to special statutes, low wages for hard work,
discriminatory taxation and exploitation, exposure to arbitrary treatment
without effective legal redress, and automatic subordination in all contacts
with Europeans.
Some colonial powers exempted a few selected natives (evolues, in the
Belgian and French terminology, asimilados, as the Portuguese called them)
from some legal disabilities, but, even then, the social barrier often remained.
Over time, after much interbreeding, the rigid racial distinction often broke
down or, at least, became blurred and mitigated. This clearly happened in
the Spanish and Portuguese American colonies (Morner, 1970; van den
Berghe, 1967). Complex processes of decolonization would require a chapter
to themselves. Even as rigid a social system as colonialism could not remain
forever frozen. In fact, colonialism rested on fragile foundations, often crashing down quickly and violently. While it existed, however, it gave the
impression of a frozen society, changing at only a glacial pace; of a strangely
stilted, archaic society unlike the rest of the world, and of a society in which
everyone is wearing masks and playing strained, unnatural roles (Fanon,
1971).
Naturally, this enormous political, economic and social barrier that separated European rulers and colonial subjects made for a sharp dichotomization of social roles depending on whether one interacted within the ethny
or across ethnic boundaries. Colonialism was an extreme case of ethnic
relations designed to maintain not only inequality across ethnic lines but
also strangeness, incomprehension and lack of empathy. Both rulers and
subjects were type-cast in stereotypic roles and attitudes, so that it was

109
extremely difficult to penetrate the ethnic role-taking and get at the individual behind it. "Knowing the natives," for Europeans meant little else
than having accepted the stereotypes and norms of the colonial society. The
recently arrived European was ridiculed as unknowledgeable and naive
because he had not yet developed the trained incapacity to have a normal
human relationship across ethnic lines.
The psychological effects of this strained play-acting were numerous and
much has been written about them (Bastide, 1950; Fanon, 1963,1965, 1971;
Mannoni, 1964; Mason, 1975; Memmi, 1965, 1968). Colonialism was dehumanizing for rulers and ruled alike. The colonial master had to bear the
strain of living up to the superman image he had created of himself and of
being surrounded by sullen, hostile people whom he feared and mistrusted
but on whom he was totally dependent. He often found solace in alcohol.
The native had to bear the constant burden of discrimination, exploitation,
injustice and humiliation. In addition, his principal defense was often to
"work within the system," i.e. to pretend to be what his masters thought
he was and by doing so, to manipulate, evade and deceive to maximum
advantage. Indeed, deceit is the last resort of the weak in oppressive situations. But it has its costs too. The role of the "good native" ascribed to the
colonial subject was demeaning and robbed him of human dignity; furthermore, by playing it, he reinforced the stereotype that created the role
in the first instance and thereby helped perpetuate the system. However,
the penalties for rejecting the type-cast roles were high, both for colonizer
and colonized. The former was socially ostracized as a traitor to his race;
the latter was branded an "uppity nigger," "cheeky kaffir" or whatever the
local phrase was, often inviting violent retribution.
In one domain, however, colonialism did not manage to repress all expressions of common humanity. It could not prevent interbreeding. To be sure,
the interbreeding was highly asymmetrical, in the hypergamous direction,
as is true in nearly all hierarchical systems. It was overwhelmingly dominant-group males who mated with subordinate-group females. In some of
the more puritan Protestant colonies of Holland and Britain, this form of
interethnic contact was severely frowned upon, while the Catholic colonizers tended to be more tolerant of concubinage with native women.
Whether condoned or condemned, it took place.
Interbreeding was no indication of racial or ethnic tolerance, as it has
sometimes been interpreted to be. Rather, it took place despite intolerance.
It shows that even the strongest social barriers between human groups cannot
block a specieswide sexual attraction. The biology of reproduction triumphs
in the end over the artificial barriers of social prejudice. The implications
of "miscegenation" (as interbreeding is called in racist societies) are even
more important for slave societies than for colonial societies. Some colonial
societies managed to survive for centuries despite extensive interbreeding.
This was the case, for instance, in the Spanish American colonies, where
the caste system gradually broke down, but where the political and economic
institutions of colonialism lingered on. In slave societies, the opportunities

110
for interbreeding were even greater than in colonial societies, but the threat
it presented to the slave system was also much greater. To this topic I now
turn.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Some classics on the colonial situation are Balandier (1970) and Mannoni (1964) on
Africa, Boeke (1953) and Fumivall (1948) on Asia, and Aguirre Beltran (1979) on
Latin America. Mason (1971) is an excellent general text with much material on
colonial societies, and the Wallerstein (1966) reader contains many excellent articles.
Influential indictements of colonialism and appeals for its overthrow are found in
Fanon (1963, 1965) and Memmi (1965,1968).

6
SLAVERY

Like "colonialism," the word "slavery" evokes strong emotions and has
been used in a wide range of meanings. However reluctantly, we must start
with a definitional exercise. In Western societies, "slavery" calls to mind
gangs of blacks picking cotton or cutting sugar cane under a white overseer
on horseback. Depending on one's politics, that vision comes either in a
liberal Roots version of cruel master and oppressed slaves—or in a conservative Gone With the Wind image of stately mansions, mint juleps, smiling mammies and spiritual-singing field hands. Much of the historical debate
over what the southern United States euphemistically called the "peculiar
institution" centers around which of these two images comes closer to reality. The current ideological fashion is to give greater credence to the liberal
version, and any revisionism in the other direction—indeed even any attempt to remove the debate from the moral arena to the empirical
one—encounters furious attack (Fogel and Engerman, 1974; Gutman, 1976).
I shall return to Western "chattel slavery" presently and devote most of
this chapter to the very peculiar brand of slavery that flourished in the
European colonies of the Western Hemisphere for roughly three-and-a-half
centuries, especially in Brazil, the Caribbean and the southern English colonies of continental North America. Before I do, however, I shall examine
other, very different, types of slavery, for, without this comparative overview, it is impossible to appreciate the peculiarity of Western chattel slavery.
DEFINITIONS OF SLAVERY
First, there is the issue of definition. The word is bandied about with a
bewildering array of meanings and qualifiers. One hears of "chattel slavery,"
"debt slavery," "wage slavery," being a "slave" to love, to one's work, to
one's habits, to television and so on. Obviously, in its loosest meaning,

112
slavery implies some surrender of free will, either internally or externally
generated. Here, we are not concerned with these loose usages, nor with
usages which are obviously laden with ideological overtones, as when Marxists talk of "wage slavery." (Since slavery normally means unpaid work,
"wage slavery" is no great addition to the arsenal of analytical concepts!)
Within the narrower definitions of slavery, two main traditions are discernible. One stresses the legal aspects of slavery and defines slavery principally in terms of deprivation of certain rights of free adult men or of a
general status subject to specific disabilities and restrictions not imposed
on free adult men. The qualification of freedom by age and sex is necessary
here because in all human societies, children are deprived of many rights
of adults and are often treated as a species of property of their parents; and
in the vast majority of societies women do not have equal rights with men.
Yet, to extend the definition of slavery to women and children, although
it might please some feminists, child-rights activists and other champions
of good egalitarian causes, would dilute the concept well beyond its optimum analytical usefulness.
The second tradition in the definition of slavery stresses the economic
aspects of the institution and defines slavery as compulsory labor without
remuneration—as complete alienation from the product of one's labor. Here,
too, one must exclude parental and marital relations, for, within the domestic family economy, there is much compulsory, unremunerated work
that can only be called "slavery" through an unhelpful stretch of the concept.*
Both types of definition of slavery leave unresolved a number of ambiguous or marginal cases. Does imprisonment for a crime constitute slavery?
Some authors have argued that it does, or at least that the two have much
in common (Sellin, 1976), but most definitions of slavery imply moral
blamelessness on the part of the slave. By that criterion the millions of
political prisoners in the Soviet and Nazi concentration camps of the 1930s
and 1940s were slaves, a definition broadly congruent with other forms of
state slavery in antiquity. Surely, there was no fundamental difference between the Soviet inmate of the Gulag Archipelago digging a canal, the Jew
or the Communist loaned out to Krupp by the SS concentration camp, the
Slav or Moor pulling the oar of a Venetian galley, or the Nubian building
a pyramid for King Cheops. But, what of compulsory military service? Legal
attempts at having it declared "involuntary servitude" have consistently
failed, for readily understandable reasons, even though the "wages" involved are often nominal.
Serfdom and "debt peonage" are often marginal cases. A serf may be
nominally free to go, but what if he has no other place to go? A peon or
sharecropper may receive cash, but what if the wages are below subsistence
*As I was writing, for example. I just told my reluctant son to rake the grass 1 had cut the previous
day. I do not intend to pay him for his work; and as he is still a minor he does not have the
option of escaping my paternal authority. Yet. he is not. in any meaningful sense, my slave.

113
and are in fact designed to keep him in perpetual debt so as to prevent his
departure?
Legal definitions of slavery are also difficult to apply cross-culturally. A
strictly legal definition would clearly exclude serfdom and debt peonage,
for instance, but it would raise difficult problems of where to draw the line
between slavery and other types of unfreedom. Many societies give special
legal status and impose disabilities to certain categories of persons who are
not generally considered slaves. Indenture for a specified term of service is
certainly a significant infringement of freedom and can easily be converted
into outright slavery as blacks experienced in the early days of the English
American colonies, but it is not normally considered slavery. A similar
institution is "pawning," a practice in a number of central African societies
where the labor of a junior relative could be alienated to a creditor, both as
collateral and interest for a debt. The situation was temporary and nonstigmatizing and probably does not qualify as slavery, though it did entail a
loss of jural rights.
Rather different from these situations are the cases of stigmatized, outcaste
groups that suffer distinct disabilities, such as being forbidden to marry
outside their group, to live outside certain areas, to participate in political
life, to engage in any except a few defiled occupations, and so on. Examples
of such groups are numerous: blacksmiths and storytellers in many West
African societies, Jews in most of Europe until the 18th century, untouchables in India until the 20th century, the Eta or Burakumin of Japan until
the 19th century, black South Africans to this date, and blacks in the southern United States until the 1950s. Despite the stigma and often crippling
economic disabilities attached to these groups, they are better described as
castes rather than slave groups.
Our attempt to arrive at a workable concept of slavery leads us to a composite definition incorporating elements of both the legal and the economic
tradition. Let us define slavery as unremunerated, forced labor and legal
exclusion from political participation and civil rights by right of purchase
or capture—irrespective of age, sex or criminal behavior of the victim. The
definition may seem unduly restrictive, but extending it presents more problems than it solves and generally leads one to a situation where all or nearly
all human societies have "slavery." Thus, if one removes the exclusion of
sex, any of the hundreds of societies where wives are acquired by bridewealth and have little choice of husband becomes, by that token, a slave
society.
The above definitional exercise may strike some readers as sterile and
arbitrary, especially if they have ideological axes to grind. It leads, however,
to an interesting and unpremeditated result. In an endeavor to arrive at a
definition of slavery that made sense cross-culturally, I came very close to
restricting the concept of slavery to interethnic forms of unfreedom and,
therefore, to equate slavery with a particular form of ethnic (or race) relations.
Slavery is a form of unfreedom and disability that is largely restricted to

114
ethnic strangers—to people who are defined as outside the solidary group.
Consequently, forms of unfreedom, disability or exploitation imposed on
ethnic outsiders are qualitatively different from those that befall a fellow
ethnic. A fellow ethnic may be deprived of freedom as punishment for a
crime, but that is not slavery, for slavery seldom implies the notion of
punishment. A fellow ethnic may be despised because he belongs to a lowstatus lineage, but this is not slavery either, for slavery is more than low
status. In fact, slavery is not entirely incompatible with a high status. Some
West African societies, for instance, had a "slave nobility"—certain important political and military posts reserved for slaves or descendants of
slaves (Nadel, 1942). Slaves in Imperial Rome, in Ottoman Turkey and in
China could occasionally rise to powerful positions by becoming the King's
favorite. A fellow ethnic may be economically exploited and politically
disfranchised because of age or gender, but no society regards its young or
its women as slaves, however mistreated these categories of people may
seem to an outside observer.
SLAVERY AS A FORM OF ETHNIC RELATIONS
What then makes the slave? Surely being an outsider, a foreigner, is not
enough, for not all outsiders are enslaved. Slavery is an important form of
ethnic relations but by no means the only one. Conquered indigenous groups
may be dominated and exploited, as we have seen in the last chapter, but
they are typically not enslaved. Nor are voluntary immigrants into a society,
however lowly, despised, penniless or powerless they may be on arrival—and
however discriminated against they may remain for a long time. I shall
examine examples of such immigrant pariah groups when I deal with middleman minorities in the next chapter.
A slave, then, is most likely to be not only an outsider to his master's
ethny—but an immigrant and an involuntary immigrant. But not even all
involuntary immigrants are enslaved. Sometimes imperial powers have
forced entire conquered groups to relocate. It is true that such situations
have been called slavery, as with the Jews in Egypt and Babylonia. I suspect,
however, that so long as the basic kinship and social structure of the conquered group was left standing, such collective "captivity" resembled colonial status more than slavery. Certainly, many types of forced population
transfers within or between states had nothing to do with slavery. Between
states, population transfers often take the form of swapping of ethnic or
religious minorities, each group joining the main body of its ethny. Examples
are the Muslim-Hindu transfers between India and Pakistan after independence in 1947 or the transfers of Germans, Poles and other central Europeans after World War II. Within states, imperial powers have often
summarily moved entire populations groups; the Incas, for instance, regularly did so to colonize distant areas with groups of proven loyalty and to
bring unassimilated groups under closer control near the center of the empire. These groups, known as mitimae, were certainly not slaves.

115
The only additional condition making for enslavement, besides foreign
and involuntary immigrant status, is isolation. The slave is, at least initially,
the atomized individual torn out of his social group—the person without
kinsmen, without a lineage, without a group to call his own. The slave is,
first and foremost, a person torn out of his network of kin selection. He is
not only involuntarily among ethnic strangers in a strange land; he is there
alone, without his support group of kinsmen and fellow ethnics. Even if
there are fellow ethnics among other slaves, he is prevented by the circumstances of his enslavement to reconstitute an ethnic support group. He is
on his own.
The next question is this: What circumstances create slaves? There are
basically two: capture (through war or kidnapping) and purchase, followed
by long-distance travel outside one's ethnic territory. This basic scenario
describes equally well the most commercialized forms of capitalist chattel
slavery practiced by European countries in the New World and the most
primitive forms of slavery between small stateless societies all over the
world. There are vast differences of scale, of economic rationality and of
organizational complexity between these slave-holding societies, but the
basic story of individual capture or purchase followed by removal from
home territory in the great common denominator of slavery.

D O M E S T I C VS CHATTEL SLAVERY
Western literature on slavery is heavily ideological and moralistic. Since
the 18th century, and even before, the ethical tradition of the West has put
the institution on trial, even while it was still widely practiced and while
it was being revived on a vast scale. Thus, the rebirth of large-scale slavery
in the West since the 16th and, increasingly, in the 17th, 18th and 19th
centuries was accompanied by an outpouring of literature attacking and
defending slavery. This reached a crescendo with the abolitionist movements of the 18th and 19th centuries, especially in Britain, the United States,
France and Brazil, and from the late 18th century the apologists for slavery
were clearly on the defensive.
In hundreds of societies where slavery existed over several thousand
years, slavery was taken for granted and required no apology. The peculiar
desire in the West to apologize for the existence of slavery had far-reaching
and paradoxical consequences, the most important of which was the florescence of racism. The virulent form of racism that developed in much of
the European colonial and slave world was in significant part born out of
a desire to justify slavery. If it was immoral to enslave people, but if at the
same time it was vastly profitable to do so, then a simple solution to the
dilemma presented itself: slavery became acceptable if slaves could somehow be defined as somewhat less than fully human.
I shall return to that theme later, but even today, nearly a century after
the abolition of slavery in the last major Western country (Brazil in 1888),
the scholarly literature on slavery is still saturated with guilt and moralism.

116
Slavery and the Holocaust are probably the two monumental events of modern Western history that the conscience of the Western world cannot live
down. Unfortunately, moralism often interferes with scholarship, so that
today when someone suggests, for example, that the material conditions of
slavery in the United States were on the whole no worse than those of many
free workers—and far superior to those prevailing in Brazil or the Caribbean
(Fogel and Engerman, 1974), he is sure to elicit passionate dissent because
he is immediately seen as a rehabilitator of slavery. The vast bulk of the
historiography on slavery has stressed the dehumanizing nature of slavery,
more particularly of the Western brand of chattel slavery, and most especially of slavery in the English colonies.
The main ideological thrust of the slavery literature has been to document
how horrible slavery was, and the comparative literature has mostly compared degrees of badness (Freyre, 1964; Tannenbaum, 1947). The consensual
outcome has been that, while all slavery is bad, Western capitalist "chattel"
slavery was considerably worse than the "domestic" slavery practiced in
many precapitalist, non-Western societies, and that of all the brands of
chattel slavery the one imposed by the Protestant powers, especially England, was more ruthless and dehumanizing than the Catholic, especially the
Iberian, variety.
This exercise in guilt expiation of Western, particularly Anglo-Saxon,
scholars has not been fruitful. Degrees of evil are difficult to measure, and
the outcome differs radically depending on the criteria chosen. For example,
even if one accepts the Tannenbaum (1947) thesis that the Catholic, Latin
legal and religious tradition made for a more benign and less dehumanizing
conception of slavery in Ibero-America than the Protestant, English tradition
in the United States, by material criteria the United States comes off much
better. Slave mortality was much higher in Brazil and the Caribbean than
in the United States, which was the only major slave society where the slave
population grew by natural increase rather than importation.
One of the legacies of this guilt-expiating tradition has been the dichotomy
between "domestic" and "chattel" slavery. By chattel slavery is generally
meant the rational, systematic exploitation of slave labor in vast capitalist
enterprises, mostly plantations and mines, producing commodities for the
world market. By contrast, domestic slavery is defined as the small-scale
slavery prevalent in hundreds of precapitalist (and often preliterate and
even prestate) societies, in which slaves often became incorporated into the
extended family structure of their owners and, in time, became assimilated
into their captors' society.
Unquestionably, there are crucial differences in types of slavery, but any
simple dichotomy of depraved capitalists and noble savages simply will not
do. The differences between "domestic" and "chattel" slavery are largely
differences of scale and complexity of society, and of mode of production,
rather than differences in degrees of badness. It is true that in a number of
non-Western societies slaves were treated more or less as poor relatives and
were gradually assimilated, especially if they were females. But the horror

117
stories also abound and easily match anything that a Mississippi cotton
plantation can offer. Male slaves were frequently castrated in Muslim societies, sometimes under such brutal conditions that 80 to 90% died of the
operation (Bovill, 1958, pp. 244-245; A. G. B. Fisher and H. J. Fisher, 1971).
The funeral of a king in Dahomey was accompanied by mass executions of
slaves who were buried with him (Herskovits, 1938). War captives and
slaves were systematically humiliated and often tortured to death in some
North American Indian societies. Among some South American groups of
the Amazon Rain Forest, slaves were well-fed, but only in preparation for
a cannibalistic feast preceded by a mock battle in which the slave would
be clubbed to death (Magalhaes de Gandavo, 1922, first published in 1575).
The Tuareg of West Africa kept Bela slaves to work in salt mines under
conditions probably far worse than those prevailing in any American plantation. Miner (1965, pp. 40-41) writes of domestic slavery in Timbuctoo:
Many aspects of the old system of slavery were not particularly harsh and a
household slave was probably in a more favorable position than a poor freeman
today.
But in the very next paragraph he describes the Tuareg slave-holding system
in much less benign terms:
Probably the most vicious aspect of the old system of slavery was the ruthlessness
with which families were broken up. The Tuareg made a practice of separating
children from their parents, which may account for the almost complete acculturation of Bela to Tuareg ways of life. Some work, such as that in the salt pits
at Taodeni. was literally killing. There men worked all day in terrific heat with
their legs in salt water. The only drinking water was also salty.
What distinguishes Western chattel slavery from domestic slavery is not
greater moral depravity, but greater economic rationality born out of a capitalist mode of production oriented to a world market and consciously profitmaximizing. Before I turn to the slave regimes of the Western Hemisphere,
however, I shall briefly examine domestic slavery.

SLAVERY IN PRECAPITALIST SOCIETIES
From contemporary ethnography, we can reconstruct the moment of human
evolution where slavery appeared. Slavery is part of the set of transformations that accompanied the domestication of plants and animals some 10,000
years ago, in the so-called Neolithic Revolution. It clearly antedates the rise
of states, for many contemporary stateless societies already had slavery, but
it came after the development of agriculture and livestock breeding.
To a hunter and gatherer, a slave is worthless. Why should a stranger be
fed and watched over in a society that produces little or no surplus and
where labor is not the scarce factor of production? The difference between
abundance and scarcity in hunting and gathering societies largely originates
in ecological conditions such as rainfall. When times are good, food is
readily gathered without any need for additional labor: in periods of scarcity,

118
extra labor is even more useless as it represents a net drain on scarce resources. Female slaves would, of course, produce children for their male
owners, but the hunting and gathering mode of production puts severe
ecological constraints on polygyny. The cost of slave keeping is not only
one of providing food and bare necessities, but also that of supervision. A
slave, being a stranger, can, by definition, not be trusted and, therefore, must
be prevented from running away, doing mischief and, if male, impregnating
the captors' women. Unless the value of the slave's labor more than equals
both sustenance and custodial costs, slavery is not a viable institution.
Agriculture is clearly the critical threshold where slave labor is economically exploitable because, with agriculture, labor becomes a scarce factor
of production, and surplus can be accumulated. Even the simplest kind of
agriculture—tropical swidden horticulture—is much more labor-intensive
than hunting and gathering. Slave labor can mean surplus production. With
surplus production, more extensive polygyny also becomes possible. Wealth
can be converted into wives through payment of bridewealth, an institution
very common among tropical horticulturalists, and women are put to work
in the fields creating wealth (as well as children) for their husbands.
In simple horticultural societies, women make far more desirable slaves
than men. They often not only do the bulk of the agricultural labor, but they
also increase the fitness of their male owners by producing children. Also,
to capture a woman spares her captor the cost of the bridewealth he would
have had to pay for a woman from his own ethny. Furthermore, female
slaves are more easily controlled than male ones, especially when burdened
with young children. Male slaves, on the other hand, are much freer to run
away and, unless castrated or closely watched, present a constant threat to
the fitness of their masters. They are often still more trouble than they are
worth. That is why many societies that regularly capture and take in women
from other ethnies, keep few, if any, male slaves and then often keep them
for relatively short periods of time (such as a few weeks of fattening before
eating them).
By contrast, the control and incorporation of captured women is so easy
that it often does not even require real institutionalized slavery. Captured
women, after an initial "breaking in" period in which they may be gangraped, have their children killed and be otherwise ill-treated, become gradually incorporated as junior wives in polygynous households and, after a
while, are often treated much as native women. (Some might argue that
captured women do not have to be given a special slave status, as ali women
in their societies are "enslaved"; this, again, extends the definition of slavery.) In any case, their children are typically completely assimilated into
the captor group.
The regular use of male slave labor is found in some of the more complex
stateless societies. Stateless but stratified nomadic societies like the Tuareg
kept slaves to work in agriculture and in salt mines and even engaged
extensively in the trans-Saharan slave trade (Nicolaisen, 1963). But, of
course, they were in constant contact with large state societies to the north

119
and south of them, and they long acted as trade intermediaries between
them. Large-scale exploitation of slave labor and slave trading are more
characteristic of state-organized societies. In fact, relatively few preindustrial states did not have some variety or other of slavery.
In the great majority of state-level societies that were both patrilineal and
polygynous, the assimilation of female slaves and their offspring within one
or, at most, two generations was the rule. The female slave would simply
be taken in as junior wife in the polygynous household of her master, and
her children by him would, according to the rule of patrilineal descent
became free members of their father's lineage. Thus, while the institution
of slavery was permanent, the status of slave was often relatively impermanent, at least for women and children.
Male slaves were another matter. Their reproductive success was frequently seriously impaired by slavery—in extreme cases through castration,
a practice almost ubiquitous in Muslim societies and not infrequent in a
number of other societies ranging from China in the Far East to the boys'
choir of the Sistine Chapel in the West. (Indeed, castration was not always
linked to slavery.) Furthermore, those who had children had no easy way
of securing the emancipation and assimilation of their offspring, especially
not in patrilineal societies. In the latter, they sometimes gave rise to slave
lineages, set apart from the lineages of commoners and nobles and given
special hereditary functions (such as forming the king's bodyguard in the
Hausa Kingdoms), even after their members were legally emancipated (M.
G. Smith, 1960). The formation by male slaves of hereditary slave descent
groups did not preclude in some cases humane treatment and even access
to some positions of power and wealth. Indeed, some of the Islamized societies of West Africa even had a slave nobility (Nadel, 1942). Certain political offices were reserved for members of slave lineages. But the slave
status of descendants of male slaves was much more likely to become hereditary than in the case of descendants of female slaves.
The main difference, of course, in the position of male and female slaves,
even in matrilineal or bilateral descent societies, is in the option of hypergyny open to women but not to men. In virtually all slave systems, the
female slave can improve her position and that of her children by mating
with her master or one of his kinsmen. Even if emancipation does not result,
at least improved conditions can be expected, and her sexual and reproductive value to her master make the hypergynous strategy a likely possibility for almost any nubile female slave. However, the male slave is
generally debarred from access to free women. Some clandestine unions
may take place but are typically not acknowledged and institutionalized,
nor do they markedly improve the conditions of the slave. Indeed, they may
expose slaves to the danger of retribution from free men who compete for
access to these free women. Male slaves are thus frequently allowed to mate
only with slavewomen, and their offspring often inherit slave status.
Such hereditary slave groups, when they constitute themselves into established communities, often become transformed into caste or serf groups,

120
but, even then, they find it difficult to escape their underprivileged or pariah
status. An important feature of slavery is its individual nature. It is exceptional for real slave communities to develop, without becoming transformed
into something rather different from slavery. Slavery can long endure as an
institution in a given society, but the slave status of individuals is typically
only semipermanent and nonhereditary. Slaves seldom develop a sense of
community; they seldom become a corporate group—a Klasse fur sich (to
use Marxist terminology). Rather, they are much more commonly unstructured congeries of atomized individuals. The institution of slavery may
persist, but the personnel rotates. Unless a constantly renewed supply of
slaves enters a society, slavery, as an institution, tends to disappear and
transform itself into something else.
Basically, this happens in two ways: the predominantly female way of
emancipation and assimilation through concubinage with masters, and the
establishment of slave families and communities that gradually or abruptly
transform themselves into other types of groups (e.g. pariah castes, serf
groups, tribute-paying communities or share-cropping tenants). In the former case, slave status seldom survives longer than two generations. In the
latter, some kind of inferior status tends to become hereditary, but within
a few generations it typically ceases to be real slavery.
The nub of the problem is, again, kin selection. An essential feature of
slave status is the condition of being torn out of one's network of kin selection. This condition generally results from forcible removal of the slave
from his home group by capture or purchase. Being literally alone against
the world and being a stranger are the essential conditions that remove
restraints on domination and exploitation of the slave. These conditions
make him, at least initially, a dehumanized commodity, but, by definition,
they cannot last indefinitely. The longer the slave lives in his master's
society, the less of a stranger he becomes; the more ties are established—the
less alone and atomized. Since the most powerful and basic ties are those
of blood, the reconstitution of a kin network both with the master group
and within the slave group gradually transforms the very nature of slavery.
The great internal contradiction of slavery is, thus, kin selection. The only
safe way of perpetuating pure slavery is systematically to split up all kin
groups among slaves and to prevent their reproduction.
Slavery is often said to have disappeared or to be incompatible with
industrialization, but that is a liberal (and socialist) myth. Slavery was massively revived in the Soviet and Nazi concentration camps, and it was harnessed to industrial systems of production—one socialist, the other capitalist.
Slavery knows no ideological boundaries. In earlier epochs, this "idealtype" of slavery was also approximated in massive forms of chattel slavery
practiced by states. Many larger states of antiquity used massive quantities
of slaves in galleys, in salt mines, in the construction of pyramids, irrigation
systems, roads and other public works, and in plantation agriculture.
The simple dichotomy between domestic and chattel slavery, examined

121
earlier, is of limited use, hiding many differences between societies where
slavery has existed. The usual identification of chattel slavery with the
capitalist mode of production—and of domestic slavery with precapitalist
societies—breaks down on closer scrutiny. There is a clear difference of
scale and of "economic rationality" between chattel and domestic slavery.
The former is characterized by large-scale organization of labor in highly
complex, centralized states that engage in trade and produce for export
markets. But these conditions already existed in precapitalistic states, such
as Ancient Greece, Rome, Persia, Egypt and China, and continue to exist in
socialist societies, as shown by the existence of the Gulag Archipelago.
There are two interesting Marxist traditions in the treatment of slavery.
The "classical" Marxist tradition sees slavery as a precapitalist, indeed,
prefeudal, mode of production. The Neo-Marxist tradition sees chattel slavery as characteristic of agrarian capitalism. Both conceptions are wrong.
Slavery appears as soon as labor can be profitably exploited—that is, as soon
as the products of labor can be stored. Slavery increases in scale and tends
to become more systematically and rationally exploitative as productive
technology improves, as trade develops and as states become increasingly
large and centralized. The extent to which a system of slavery approaches
the "ideal type" of totally rational, dehumanized chattel slavery, where the
slave is reduced to a pure economic commodity, is determined mostly by
the power of the state and of the individual members of the ruling class
rather than by the system of production as such or, much less, by ideology.
Of course, it takes a relatively complex and differentiated system of production to produce a state powerful enough to have chattel slavery and to
make the latter profitable. Chattel slavery requires either a state able to
maintain public works and fleets of galleys, or a trading economy sufficiently
developed for large-scale mining and agricultural exports. This generally
means agrarian societies, i.e. societies relying on a complex agricultural
technology with use of animal traction, the wheel, the plow, and wind and
water power. Some societies of western Africa, which are just below that
technological threshold, already had large-scale slavery before European
conquest. Some Hausa nobles owned hundreds of slaves, and the slave
population of some West African cities like Kano is estimated to have
ranged between one-fourth and one-half of the total (A. G. B. Fisher and H.
J. Fisher, 1971; Miner, 1965; M. G. Smith, 1960). These highly stratified,
complex horticultural societies, however, did not yet have genuine chattel
slavery.
Chattel slavery is sometimes associated exclusively with agrarian societies
and is thought to be incompatible with industrialization. This notion is
invalidated not only by the 20th-century concentration camp systems in
both their Fascist and their Communist variant, but also by the use of slave
labor in 19th century factories in the United States and in Brazil (Goldin,
1975; Karash, 1975). What is needed to maintain or recreate slavery in a
modern industrial economy is a totalitarian state. The Nazi concentration

122
camps, such as Auschwitz, were surrounded by industrial out-stations especially constructed to make use of cheap labor rented out to industrialists
by the S.S. (Kogon, 1950).

SLAVERY AMONG THE HAUSA
Before turning to the slave regimes of the Western Hemisphere that are
usually considered to be the type-cases of chattel slavery, let us examine
more closely the more "domestic" type of slavery in a complex horticultural
society of Africa, the Hausa of Northern Nigeria. Our account will be based
principally upon the Emirate of Zazzau and the city of Zaria, studied by
Michael G. Smith (1960), and upon Mary F. Smith's (1954) biographical
account of a Hausa woman. The Hausa are one of the largest ethnies of
Africa; they number at least 15 million people, occupying much of Northern
Nigeria and Niger. Islamized some 500 years ago, they have a long tradition
of centralized, hierarchical states with a literate ruling class (M. G. Smith,
1965b).
The Hausa live in the savannah environment of the Western Sudan and
engage in intensive swidden agriculture, based principally on cereal crops
(sorghum, millet, maize and rice), though many other plants are cultivated
as well. Stratified into a ruling aristocracy, an urbanized middle class (traders, priests-teachers and artisans organized in specialized guilds), a mass
of peasants and slaves, they have, for at least five or six centuries, had
important cities, taken part in long-distance trade across the Sahara and
been part of large conquest empires of which the British Empire was but
the last. In short, the Hausa have long been organized in complex societies
of the feudal type, comparable in many respects to those of medieval Europe
or Japan, though not quite as technologically advanced.
Zazzau is one of the Hausa states conquered by the Fulani in 1804 and
incorporated in a vast feudal empire dominated by a mixed Hausa and
Fulani aristocracy. Inequality pervades the entire social structure. Not only
are people stratified in broad strata with specialized functions: noblemen
with political offices, priests and teachers, merchants, artisans, soldiers,
prostitutes, ordinary peasants and large numbers of slaves, but they are also
linked by personal relationships of patron to client, based on the exchange
of loyalty and services for protection. Clientage is clearly distinguishable
from slavery, since patron-client ties link not only free men and slaves, but
also free persons of unequal status, including noblemen of different
rank—all the way up to the king and his direct vassals.
When the British imposed their control over the Hausa States through
military conquest in 1902-1903, they sought to abolish slavery and the slave
trade, which they found to be well-established institutions. Their efforts
met with only very partial success, as people continued to be identified as
exslaves or descendants of slaves, and relations of master to slave continued
as clientage or serfdom. Slaves were permitted to declare themselves free,

123
but fewer than 10,000 had done so in the whole of Northern Nigeria by 1920
(M. G. Smith, 1960, p. 223). While the capture and sale of slaves was largely
abolished after British rule, the institution of slavery itself lingered on, and
abolition was very gradual.
In traditional Hausa society slavery was a legal status that could be ended
for both sexes through manumission, purchase of freedom and, for females,
through bearing a child for their master. Female slaves typically became
their master's concubines in this polygynous, Islamic society and thus had
a relatively quick escape from slavery if they were fertile. For men and their
descendants, slave status was often hereditary. A basic distinction was made
between slaves acquired through capture who were strangers and generally
non-Muslims, and those born into slavery who were raised as Muslims and
could not legally be sold. Captives were, however, sold and used by vassals
in payment of taxes to the king.
Muslim slaves born in slavery were better treated than captured pagans.
They were acculturated to the language and customs of their masters, often
lived in their master's household, called their master and his kinsmen by
their terms such as "father" and "brother," had "joking relationships" with
their master's children, took part in the religious life of their master's family
and had their marriage (sometimes to a free woman) arranged by their master.
All the same, even the privileged Muslim slaves had facial scars to identify
them as slaves, were legally and politically dependent on their masters,
passed on slave status if male to their children and could not dispose of
their property at will. The descendants of a male exslave continued to be
identified as such and to inherit inferior status, menial jobs and dependence
on the descendants of their ancestor's master. That is, even after a person
was emancipated, his dependence and that of his descendants continued
in the form of clientage or serfdom to his master's descendants. Occupationally, slaves were concentrated in menial jobs, principally in agriculture
and domestic service, but the king's slaves often became professional soldiers, and favorite slaves of high-ranking noblemen could rise to positions
of considerable power and wealth. Some rose to relatively high military or
civilian rank among the royal office holders and came to constitute a kind
of privileged, hereditary slave nobility. Slaves or exslaves could even become slave owners in their own right and could marry free persons. However, a master inherited his slave's property. A Hausa proverb justifies this
practice, as well as hereditary slavery: "If you buy a hen and a rooster in
the market and they have chickens, to whom do the chickens belong?" (M.
G. Smith, 1960, p. 259).
While many slaves lived in the intimacy of their master's extended family
and were treated as family retainers, as concubines or almost as poor relations, others were definitely exploited in a more systematic manner.
Wealthy aristocrats owned entire villages of slaves who cultivated their
lands for them; some forms of slavery thus verged on hereditary serfdom.
Accounts by 19th-century European travelers estimated the slave population

124
of some districts of Hausaland as ranging from one-third to one-half of the
total (M. G. Smith, 1960). Obviously, such a large servile population played
an important role in the system of production.
Besides the slaves proper, Hausa society also had other social groups
distinct from the mass of free men. Some occupational groups (hunters,
blacksmiths, butchers and tanners) were ascribed low status and constituted
endogamous pariah castes. Castration was also practiced, and eunuchs constituted a status group by themselves, distinct from both slaves and freemen
in that they shared some of the disabilities of the former and some of the
privileges of the latter. Their status was, in the nature of the case, irreversible
(unlike slaves who could be freed), but they had privileged access to some
important political positions.
As can be seen from this one example of slavery in a complex preindustrial, precapitalist society, the word "slavery" is merely a convenient label
covering a wide range of statuses and situations, with considerable variation
even within a single society, let alone cross-culturally. The general conclusions arrived at earlier are supported by the Hausa case, however. Female
slaves are more easily assimilated than male ones. The prototypical slave
is the stranger who is torn out of his kinship network. To the extent that the
slaves live and reproduce in their "host society," they either gradually
assimilate as individuals (especially so in the case of females), or distinct
slave groups begin to form which, in time, acquire more the characteristics
of caste, serfdom or clientage than of slavery proper.
THE SLAVE REGIMES OF THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE
Europe inherited the institution of slavery from Rome, but slavery was
gradually replaced by serfdom in much of Europe during the Middle Ages.
However, it never completely disappeared, especially not in the Mediterranean area, where the extensive use of galleys created a continuing demand
for slaves. The sudden expansion of Europe in the American tropics, in the
16th century, revived and extended European slavery on a scale hitherto
undreamt of. By the time the transatlantic slave trade was effectively ended
in the middle of the 19th century, an estimated 12 to 15 million Africans
had crossed the ocean in chains (Curtin, 1969; Davidson, 1961). The loss
of human potential to Africa caused directly or indirectly by the transatlantic
slave trade was much greater. Between 10 and 20% of the slaves (and comparable proportions of the European crews) died of disease in transit (Curtin,
1969), and vast numbers were killed as a result of the innumerable raids
and wars between African nations, fostered by the European demand for
slaves. Estimates of total deaths range from 50 to 200 million, but even the
lower estimates qualify the transatlantic slave trade as the greatest crime in
human history. (The Nazi Holocaust and Stalin's Gulag Archipelago are the
only serious contenders.)
The trade continued to grow from small-scale beginnings in the late 15th
century (Table I). Until 1600, less than a million slaves were exported from

125
TABLE I. Estimates of Slave Imports into the Americas
1500-1525
1525-1550
1550-1600
1600-1650
1650-1700
1700-1750
1750-1800
1800-1850

12.500
125.000
750.000
1,000,000
1.750,000
3,000.000
4,000,000
3.250,000

TOTAL

13,887,500

Source: Dunbar (1861).

Africa. In the 17th century, the volume of trade tripled to some 2,750,000.
In the 18th century, the "golden age" of the traffic, some 7,000,000 slaves
were transported to the Americas. The 19th century marked the first attempts
by the British Navy to halt the trade, at least in West Africa, and by the
1850s, transatlantic slaving was over. Yet, another 3 to 4 million Africans
crossed the ocean in the first half of the 19th century—at a rate comparable
to that prevailing in the 18th century.
The history of the Atlantic slave trade reveals a complex business partnership between Europeans and Africans. It pitted Africans against each
other, and European slaving nations against each other, much more than
Africans against Europeans (Davidson, 1961). Any reading of the enterprise
as one of blacks against whites is a gross distortion of a much more complex
reality. Most slaves were captured by Africans and sold by Africans to
Europeans. Extensive slave trading had existed inside West Africa and across
the Sahara, long before the European demand developed, but there is no
question that the establishment of slave colonies in the Western Hemisphere
greatly increased the traffic and intensified warfare between African nations
(Bovill, 1958; Davidson, 1961; A. G. B. Fisher and H. J. Fisher, 1971; Oliver
and Fage, 1962).
The constellation of circumstances created by European colonial expansion in tropical and subtropical America made slavery practically inevitable
and made the western coast of Africa, from Senegal to Angola, the most
likely source of supply. First the Spanish and the Portuguese, then the
English, French and Dutch, found themselves in control of tropical territories that they could not successfully settle with large numbers of Europeans, and where the indigenous population was initially sparse and
inaccessible (in the case of the Amazonian jungle) and quickly decimated
by epidemics (especially in the Caribbean).
After they discovered that these territories were suitable for the cultivation
of certain crops for export to Europe, the development of colonial economies
hinged on the importation of cheap, docile labor, i.e. of slave labor. A glance

126
at a map of the world shows that the west coast of Africa was destined to
be the source of slaves, for these reasons:
1. The West African coast was the nearest source of labor acclimatized to
the tropics. Slaves were taken mostly from West Africa to the West Indies,
and from Angola to Brazil.
2. The transatlantic slave trade fitted in nicely with the sailing circuit across
the North and South Atlantic established by the trade winds. The slave
trade thus became the notorious "Middle Passage" of a vast triangular
journey that brought European manufactured goods (firearms, textiles,
brandy, glass beads and metal wares) to Africa in exchange for slaves;
then sold slaves in exchange for tropical crops in the Americas—mostly
sugar and its derivatives (molasses and rum) but also tobacco, coffee,
indigo, cotton and others; and finally traded their colonial wares in
Europe for manufactured goods with which to buy new slaves. The risks
were substantial but so were the profits.
3. The relatively advanced societies of West Africa sustained high enough
population densities to provide a continuous supply of slaves for well
over three centuries. Contrary to general opinion, Africans were so successfully enslaved, not because they belonged to primitive cultures, but
because they had a complex enough technology and social organization
to sustain heavy losses of manpower without appreciable depopulation.
Even the heavy slaving of the 18th century made only a slight impact on
the demography of West Africa. The most heavily raided areas are still
today among the most densely populated.
4. Africans were especially valuable as a source of labor because they were
not only acclimatized to the tropics, but also because they were relatively
immune to the European diseases that decimated American Indians.
5. Most African slaves came from agricultural societies. This meant that
they were used to hard work in hot climates, and also that they had a
number of useful skills as experienced peasants, blacksmiths and so on.
The prototypical slave unit in the New World was, of course, the plantation, but not all African slaves worked on plantations. In Brazil, mining
(of diamonds and other precious stones) consumed vast numbers of slaves,
if only because mortality in the mines was extremely high. In the highlands
of Spanish America, where Indian labor was cheaper and more abundant,
African slaves often became prized house servants and artisans, living in
cities. Even on the West Indies islands, whose economies were almost exclusively based on sugar cane plantations, a minority of the slaves were
house servants and craftsmen, living in towns. Nevertheless, the mass of
slaves in the colonies that relied most heavily on slave labor consisted of
field hands on plantations.
Of the crops produced by slave plantations, sugar was by far the most
important. The Spanish saying stated it well: Donde hay azucar, hay negros.
("Where there is sugar, there are blacks.") Successful sugar cultivation is
both capital- and labor-intensive because the sugar cane, once cut, must be

127
crushed and converted into sugar and molasses before it ferments. This
requires a fairly large scale of production. Each unit of production must
have ready access to a processing mill, and although it was possible for
several smaller plantations to share a mill, the ideal setup was a plantation
of several hundred hectares with its own mill and a slave labor force of 100
men or more, and with continuous, year-round cane cutting and processing.
A sugar plantation was a complex operation requiring a large supply of
disciplined, robust workers driven to cut cane, an animal transport system
to bring the cane to the mill, and skilled craftsmen to run the mill and keep
the machinery in good repair. The sugar plantation, in short, was a little
self-contained rural industry, relying on coercion to squeeze maximum
profit from an unwilling labor force.
A breakdown of the destination of slaves in the New World clearly shows
the paramount importance of sugar as the main crop of the slave plantation
system. Between 1701 and 1810, at the height of the system of plantation
slavery, British North America imported a mere 348,000 slaves—about 3,000
a year. By comparison, the Spanish colonies imported 579,000 (mostly in
Cuba, Santo Domingo, Puerto Rico and the coastal strips of Mexico, Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru); the British Caribbean islands, 1,401,000;
the French Caribbean, 1,358,000; the Dutch islands, 460,000; and Brazil,
1,891,000 (Pescatello, 1975, pp. 47-48).
These figures reveal how marginal to the slave trade the southern United
States were. They were in fact the only major slave plantation area devoted
to crops other than sugar cane (first tobacco, then cotton), the only nontropical area and the only area where slave plantations co-existed with
yeoman farming (not in the exact same location, to be sure, but in closely
contiguous zones). Since tobacco and cotton did not have the same complex
technological requirements as sugar making, southern United States plantations could be, and indeed typically were, much smaller than the sugar
plantations of the Caribbean and Brazil. In 1860, on the eve of emancipation,
there were about 350,000 slave owners in the United States—1.3% of the
country's whites. Among them, they owned some 3,952,000 slaves, for an
average of only a little over 11 slaves per owner.
Only one-fourth of the slaves lived on plantations of over 50 slaves; only
2,600 United States plantations had more than 100 slaves. Below size 50,
one may question the appropriateness of the term "plantation" (Genovese,
1974, p. 7). Roughly half of the slaves lived in productive units of less than
20 to 50 slaves. By comparison, the average late-18th century Jamaican
plantation had 240 slaves (Craton, 1975, p. 252). That is, many slaves in the
American South lived either on medium-size farms rather than real plantations, and quite a few even lived as servants and craftsmen in cities. The
plantation regime was really marginal to the North American economy and
was only one of the economic sectors of the American South.
Of course, one of the main reasons why so relatively few slaves were
imported into the English North American colonies, is that the life expectancy of slaves in North America was much higher than in the rest of the

128
slave colonies. This was a result both of a healthier climate, free of most
tropical diseases, and of better diet and work conditions (Fogel and Engerman, 1974). Indeed, the North American slave population was the only one
in the Western Hemisphere that increased more by reproduction than by
immigration. In the 50 years between 1810 (after the slave imports were
halted in the United States) and 1860, the "Negro" population more than
tripled from 1.4 to 4.4 million. To be sure, these figures involved many
people of mixed descent, but since very few "blacks" were born to white
women, the increase still reflects a good measure of the reproductive success
of black women. Considering that this period antedates the advances of
preventive medicine in the latter part of the 19th century, such a rate of
population increase is quite remarkable. It was undoubtedly one of the
highest in the world at that time and is comparable to the reproductive
success of French Canadians—a proverbially prolific group—during the
same period. Between 1815 and 1865, the population of Quebec (which was
overwhelmingly French and, after the British conquest, increased almost
exclusively by natural increase) grew from 265,000 to 980,000, a multiplication factor of 3.7 compared to 3.1 for U.S. blacks (Urquhart and Buckley,
1965).

THE GUILT ASCRIPTION GAME: WHOSE SLAVERY
WAS WORSE?
Such a conclusion seemingly contradicts much historiography that has depicted the North American variety of chattel slavery as especially ruthless
and harsh (Freyre, 1963, 1964; Tannenbaum, 1947). In fact, that tradition
based its conclusions principally on the legal status of slaves and the frequency of manumission. The latter was indeed much more infrequent and
difficult in the United States than in Brazil, and even in the West Indies
where a large middle class of free mulattoes gradually emerged on most
islands (Lowenthal, 1972). As Genovese (1969b) points out, any comparison
of slave regimes must clearly distinguish between (1) material conditions
of life (work, diet, housing, clothing, hygiene), (2) social conditions (family
security, religious life), and (3) access to freedom and citizenship. Revisionist historiography has established that, even in the second respect, North
American slavery was not as destructive as it had long been depicted to
have been (Gutman, 1976). Only on the third basis of comparison does North
American slavery come out unfavorably.
The main differences between the American slave regimes become understandable in materialist terms, without invoking cultural differences in
degrees of benevolence or malevolence. In North America, the legal inportation of slaves was stopped in 1808 (20 years after the U.S. Constitution
was adopted) and, thereafter, the supply of slaves became, but for a little
contraband, entirely internal. Prices rose to about $l,800-$2,000 for young
adults (a figure to be multiplied at least sixfold in today's dollars), and high
prices made it profitable to protect the investment through good diet and

129
medical care—and to promote reproduction. Even before the importation
of slaves was stopped, slaves cost more in North America than in the West
Indies, because they generally went through middlemen, usually in Jamaica,
where they were kept to be "seasoned" and to recover from the Middle
Passage before resale for profit on the continent.
Until the 19th century, the demand for slaves in North America was not
very great. Since slaves took well to the mild climate of the American South,
owners discovered that it was more profitable to keep their slaves strong
and healthy and to encourage slavewomen to reproduce than to rely on
fresh stock from Africa, who often arrived sick, who had to be broken into
slavery, who had to be trained from scratch and who were often seditious
and escape-prone. The premium was thus on satisfaction of the demand for
slaves through internal reproduction and on long-range exploitation of a
high-quality labor force born to slavery (hence, more docile), acclimatized
to local conditions (and therefore healthier), culturally assimilated to their
masters (and therefore easier to handle) and skilled in a wide diversity of
tasks ranging from field work and domestic service to the full range of
specialized crafts like needlework, blacksmithing and carpentry.
Once established, this system of breeding your own slaves created an
approximately equal sex ratio that further facilitated reproduction. As for
material conditions, the more diversified agriculture of North America made
it possible to feed slaves an adequate diet inexpensively. Food was locally
produced, often on the plantation itself or nearby. In short, in North America,
where slaves were expensive but where conditions of survival were good,
the emphasis was on long-range productivity: slaves were not only worked,
they were also systematically bred. Slave breeding became a special kind
of animal breeding, especially developed in the "Old South," to supply the
growing labor demands of the larger cotton plantations of the "New South"
after the 1 8 3 0 s (Sutch, 1975).

These rational considerations made for relatively good material treatment
of slaves, but they also discouraged manumission. Since slaves were such
a large investment and skilled slaves were so expensive and difficult to
replace, manumission was correspondingly costly. The owner thereby lost
considerable productive capital, and the slave or exslave had little chance
of accumulating enough money to buy his own or his relatives' freedom.
Therefore, manumission was infrequent and discouraged. Only about onetenth of the "Negro" population of the United States was free in 1860. A
greatly disproportionate number of them were mulattoes, and, thus, presumably often blood relatives of the master who emancipated them or their
ancestors. The only other slaves who were regularly emancipated were old
people past productive and reproductive age, so as to avoid the cost of
feeding the aged and infirm. This was such a problem that several southern
states passed laws requiring slave owners to post a large bond when they
manumitted slaves, so as to forestall the danger of old freedmen becoming
a public burden.
My argument, in short, is not that North American slave owners were

130
more humane than elsewhere, but that conditions in North America favored
keeping slaves strong and healthy and, therefore, productive and reproductive. By contrast, conditions in Brazil and the West Indies were radically
different. The climate was tropical and thus mortality was higher. Slaves
were principally in sugar cane plantations and secondarily in mines. In both
cases, work conditions were extremely strenuous; in mines, they were downright lethal. Slaves were cheaper than in North America because the West
Indies and Brazil were closer to the source of supply. However, providing
slaves with an adequate diet was more difficult, especially in the West
Indies where agricultural land was scarce and allocated almost exclusively
to the monoculture of sugar cane. Staple foods had to be imported, and they
tended to be low-quality starches. Slave reproduction was hampered not
only by disease, poor diet and high mortality but also by a high masculinity
ratio. Since the demand was principally for strong field or mine workers,
many more men were brought in than women. Women took nearly as much

space on slave ships and fetched a lower price on arrival, unless they were

particularly attractive.
Jointly, all these conditions dictated a different optimum solution in the
utilization of slave labor. Except for a small elite of skilled house servants
and craftsmen, maximum productivity was achieved by working slaves to
an early death (often in a few months in the case of the Brazilian mines, in
a few years in the West Indian sugar plantations), and then by replacing
them with fresh imports. The motivation was cold profit maximization unaffected by moral considerations (Fogel and Engerman, 1974; Engerman,
1975). On the positive side, since slaves were cheaper, more expendable
and more easily replaceable, it followed that manumission was relatively
easier and more frequent than in North America. Thus, the seeming paradox
in the relative "benevolence" or "malevolence" of slave regimes is resolved.
The material conditions of slavery and the ease of emancipation vary inverse!)' with each other—and for basically materialist reasons. It is as meaningless to compare slave regimes in terms of how humane or inhuman they
were as it would be to debate whether the Soviet concentration camps were
more humane than the Nazi ones, or whether Buchenwald was better than
Dachau.
Chattel slavery is, first and foremost, a system of production adapted to
a set of ecological and social conditions. Its modalities are understandable
much more in terms of an ecological model of fitness maximization
(or—what is substantially the same—an economic model of profit maximization) than in terms of an idealist model ascribing causality to ideological
and cultural superstructures. Least enlightening of all in understanding the
nature of slavery is the moralistic game of guilt ascription or expiation.
Indeed, the blanket ascription of collective racial guilt for slavery to
"whites" that is so dear to many liberal social scientists is in itself a product
of the racist mentality produced by slavery. It takes a racist to ascribe causality and guilt to racial categories.

131

PATERNALISM, HYPERGAMY AND KIN SELECTION
A feature of slave plantations that has been extensively stressed is paternalism or patriarchy (Freyre, 1963, 1964; Genovese, 1969a, 1974; van den
Berghe, 1978a). Descriptions abound of the slave plantation as a self-contained, self-sufficient microcosm under the patriarchal authority of the
owner, as a kind of big unhappy family, so to speak. All chattel slave regimes
developed a legitimating ideology of paternalism. Apologists for slavery
depicted the slave as a kind of irresponsible, immature, impulsive, emotional, happy-go-lucky, grown-up child who could not fend for himself and
in whose best interest it was, therefore, to be taken care of by a benevolent
master. The latter was, in turn, described as a father figure having the welfare
and happiness of his unwilling charges at heart. Some authors went as far
as to interpret the master-slave relationship in turgid psychoanalytic terms,

such as a complementary sadomasochistic relationship rooted in pseudo-

oedipal conflicts (Freyre, 1963, 1964). Others simply dismissed the pate
nalistic fagade of the slave plantation as a self-serving ideological
superstructure to justify slavery (Cox, 1948; Genovese, 1969a, 1974).

Once again, the issue is not how benevolent slave owners really were, or
what the proportion of "good masters" was. There is no question that paternalism was a self-serving apology for slavery. One also does not need to
search far to see that the paternalistic etiquette of dominance and subservience, including the "Sambo psychology" of slaves (pretending incompetence, childish delight and grateful sycophancy), was a ritualistic fagade
masking real attitudes. Indeed, this paternalistic etiquette of ethnic relations
is not unique to slave regimes: it is found wherever two groups live sideby-side in a situation of great inequality combined with close spatial proximity and emotional intimacy. The parent-child model of interaction, which
also has these properties, is easily extended by analogy to the master—slave
relationship.
It does not take far-fetched psychoanalytic concepts of oedipal conflicts
and sadomasochism to understand why paternalism is so popular a model
for tyranny. Where a parental-filial relationship does exist, kin selection
ensures that the interaction, however unequal, is mutually beneficial in
most cases. That is, the real father does have an interest in the fitness of his
children and does generally discipline them "for their own good," because
their own good is also his own good. Their genes are also his. Where the
parentage is fictive, so, we may assume, is the benevolence. Paternalism
uses the fiction of biological relatedness to make tyranny appear just. It uses
the deep-rooted symbols of kin selection as a political mystification to justify
parasitic exploitation and to hide the coercive nature of the political system
that perpetuates that exploitation.
But what if masters and slaves were in fact relatives, as they frequently
were? We know that all slave systems, chattel and domestic alike, are great
genetic melting pots. It is precisely the nearly complete control of the master

132
over his female slaves that makes for the high rate of interbreeding characteristic of all slave regimes, and which differentiates slavery from other
types of ethnic subordination such as ordinary conquest, pariah caste status
or even serfdom. Under slavery, male slaves are virtually powerless to prevent their masters from mating with "their" women. Slavewomen also lack
effective power to resist and, furthermore, they can gain appreciable advantages by not resisting.
Therein lies the fundamental asymmetry of male and female slavery. The
mating system of the slave plantation was both polygynous and hypergynous. The owner, his sons and the overseer were polygynous since they had
access not only to white women whom they married—but also the pick of
young slaves whom they took as concubines. Concubinage with slaves was
somewhat more clandestine and hypocritical in the English and Dutch colonies than in the Spanish, Portuguese and French territories where it was
brazen, but there is no evidence that the actual incidence of interbreeding
was any higher in the Catholic countries. It is safe to assume that, since
control over slaves was about equal, the opportunities for mating with slaves
were also similar, and that most such opportunities were taken since they
combined business with pleasure. Mulatto slaves were generally worth more
than black ones, and therefore masters had a financial incentive to encourage
interbreeding if not by themselves, then by their overseers or guests (who
were often offered the sexual hospitality of a slavegirl).
From the standpoint of the slavewoman, mating with an owner or overseer
was a form of hypergyny. It gave her a chance for a better job in the big
house, for better diet and clothes for herself and her offspring and perhaps
the hope of emancipation, or at least favorite treatment, for her children. In
all slave regimes, there was a close association between manumission and
European ancestry. In 1850, in the United States, for example, an estimated
37% of the free "Negroes" had white ancestry, compared to about 10% of
the slave population. The southern free Negro population was even more
disproportionately mulatto (Genovese, 1974, p. 414). In the West Indies,
too, the free people of color were predominantly mulattoes and quadroons,
so much so that, on many islands, they came to constitute a clearly distinct
middle class in a three-tiered hierarchy of color (Craton, 1975). This hierarchy survived slavery, existing to this day. The elite is white; the middle
class is brown; and the mass of peasants and workers is black (Lowenthal,
1972). Obviously, nepotism often resulted in manumission of relatives.
Even if the slavewoman wanted to resist her master's attentions, she was
seldom in a position to do so; consequently, she often had little option but
to make the best of a bad bargain and bear her master's children. This was
often a better option than mating with another slave with little opportunity
of bettering her children's life chances. In either case, the product of her
reproductive investment was the property of her master. In either case, she
increased her fitness, but, through the hypergynous strategy, her chances
of improvement for herself and her offspring were better.

133
Conversely, the male slave's fitness was greatly diminished by slavery,
much more than the fitness of the female slave. He was denied access to
white women, often under penalty of death or castration. The economics
of most slave regimes, by creating a considerable surplus of male over female
slaves, imposed celibacy or polyandry on the male slave, thus further reducing his reproductive success. Of the slavewomen, the younger and more
attractive ones were often preempted by the white owners and overseers.
He was thus left with the older, less fertile ones.
Even then, his choice of mates was often curtailed by his master. It is not
true that slave owners systematically broke up slave couples (Genovese,
1974; Gutman, 1976). On the contrary, it was often in their interest to foster
stable slave families, for the sake of morale, and to discourage escape. Sometimes, slaves were sold or exchanged to permit a valued slave to live with
the woman of his choice if she belonged to another plantation. Again, benevolence is not the question here, but interest. There were not enough
slavewomen to permit stable monogamy for most male slaves in most slave
regimes. Those who were stably mated often had to be content with older
women. Many had no permanent mate at all, had to share women with other
slaves, and had their sex lives reduced to irregular, unstable relationships.
All this translated into low average reproductive success for male slaves.
The first significant consequence of this hypergynous, polygynous mating
system of the plantation was, thus, a great sexual asymmetry in the reproductive impact of slavery for men and women. Slavery drastically reduced
the fitness of male slaves; it had little or no such adverse effect on the fitness
of female slaves whose masters had a double interest—financial and genetic—in having them reproduce at maximum capacity.
This sexual asymmetry of reproductive strategy for male and female slaves
had as a consequence frequent conflicts of interest between slavemen and
slavewomen. In particular, the men resented both their inability to protect
their women from sexual contact with whites and the women's greater opportunities for improved status and treatment. Also, many male slaves did
not have the consolation available to almost all slavewomen—of procreating
and raising their own children.
At a group level, these conflicts between the sexes within the slave population were an important factor militating against the formation of group
cohesion and solidarity among slaves. Slaves were effectively prevented
from forming an effective solidary community, not only because they came
from a great many different origins and were often uprooted by sales, but
also because of these sex conflicts. Slavery was much tougher on men than
on women. No wonder that so many black women emerged from it as towers
of strength, compared to their male companions. They had an easier time
of it. It is perhaps not far-fetched to suggest that, even today, much of the
ambivalence in relations between black men and women in America (including the stereotypes of female strength and male weakness) has its roots
in the highly asymmetrical mating system of the slave plantation.

134
The second fundamental consequence of the polygynous, hypergynous
system of plantation mating was that it undermined the institution of slavery
itself by continuously creating ties of blood between masters and slaves,
and between whites and blacks. That is, kin selection operated across racial
lines, so that the plantation was in fact a breeding system—a big family of
sorts, albeit a rather perverse exemplar thereof.
After several generations of interbreeding, a complete phenotypic continuum between African and European was created, making the categorical
racial distinction that underlied Western slavery increasingly tenuous and
untenable. If the rationale for keeping a person enslaved was that he was
black and therefore inferior, near-white slaves were a constant embarrassment and a living reproach. And, if these mulattoes and quadroons were,
in addition, your children, your grandchildren, your half-siblings, your cousins, your nephews and nieces, your uncles and aunts, the embarrassment
became even more acute. You had to admit that the blood you shared with
them enobled them; but if that were so, then how could you justify retaining
them as slaves?
Obviously, nepotism operated between masters and slaves as it did within
the two groups. The biological basis of kin selection was too deep to have
been completely overridden by such a recent and arbitrary cultural arrangement as slavery. Slaves who were kinsmen were treated preferentially and
often freed. Slave mothers could not hate their master's children if the latter
were also their own. Inevitably deep bonds were created between masters
and slaves, making for multiple strains within the system of slavery itself.
To the extent that the plantation was an enclosed breeding unit, a reproducing population in the genetic sense, the chasm between master and slave
was at least partially bridged, and the rudiments of a genuine extended
family, of a clan, or a micro-ethny were laid.
Paternalism was thus not entirely a myth. The plantation was always an
incipient family and therein was its deepest contradiction, a contradiction
that it could not, in the long run, survive. Chattel slavery was a system of
ruthless, parasitic exploitation, serving the interests of the masters. But if
slaves become kinsmen you cannot exploit them without indirectly exploiting yourself. Yet slavery, by making the slavewoman widely available
to her master made this paradoxical outcome inevitable. Western slavery
thus literally contained the genetic seeds of its own destruction. A slave
system can only perpetuate itself by continuously replacing its personnel.
A breeding slave system cannot persist very long. Slavery makes for quick
acculturation and interbreeding. Assimilation in the second or third generation is almost irresistible.
EPILOGUE
Ironically, while all the slave plantation regimes of the Western Hemisphere
bore an air of family resemblance, they gave birth after their demise to very
different societies with radically distinct types of race and ethnic relations

135
(van den Berghe, 1978a). Even a relatively small area like the Caribbean
shows a bewildering internal diversity of systems of race, ethnic and class
stratification.
At one end of the spectrum are the societies, principally Spanish-speaking,
where the descendants of slaves are almost totally assimilated to, and undistinguishable from, the rest of the population. Mexico is a case in point.
It has approximately the same percentage of its population as the United
States who are of wholly or partially African descent (Aguirre Beltran, 1946).
Yet, today, there is no group of people in Mexico who consider themselves
or are considered by others as blacks, Africans or in any sense distinct from
descendants of Amerindians or Europeans. If one travels to Vera Cruz, one
encounters many people who bear clear traces of an African ancestry, but
they are completely assimilated in the rest of the population. They seemingly
do not even tend to be endogamous.
At the other end of the continuum, the United States stands out as a rigid
racial-caste society. There, strangely, as slavery was abolished, racism—the
underlying rationale for slavery—survived. The ideological mystification
survived the economic institution. Whites who, for over two centuries, had
lived and interbred with blacks in situations of intimate and continuous
contact suddenly shuddered at the thought of living with them as equals.
Masters and slaves had created a common culture and were in the process
of welding themselves into a new hybrid race. Suddenly, whites discovered
a concern for the purity of their blood and rent asunder what was being
forged together. They created a system of racial segregation that confined
all those tainted with the stigma of African blood to pariah status, including

in many cases their own relatives (Woodward, 195

In between these extremes are countries like Brazil, Cuba, Jamaica, Puerto
Rico and other Caribbean islands where people are still conscious of a color
continuum that broadly correlates with social class distinctions, but where
there are no distinct, corporate racial groups. People tend to marry partners
of adjacent shades on the color spectrum and tend to associate certain "somatic norm images" (Hoetinck, 1967) with certain descriptive racial labels,
but there are no breaks in the spectrum, no barriers between groups, no
rigidity or racial self-consciousness in interaction. Those societies are racially conscious but not racially segregated.
Clearly, the association between slavery and racism that is so often taken
for granted is merely an accidental artifact of the history of Western expansion. Slavery has often existed without any trace of racism. Conversely,
racism can develop and persist in the absence of slavery. That Western
racism became a convenient ideological underpinning of slavery was simply
a result of the fact that slaves were fetched from far away and, consequently,
looked very different from their masters. The history of the United States
since 1865 shows that, unfortunately, racism can long survive slavery. In
fact, the present system of endogamous racial castes in the United States is
more likely to perpetuate racism than the system of slavery that preceded
it.

136
SUGGESTED READINGS
The literature on slavery is not only voluminous but much of it is excellent. For
accounts of slavery and the slave trade in traditional African societies, see Bovill
(1958), A. G. B. Fisher and H. J. Fisher (1971) and Miner (1965). On the transatlantic
slave trade, Curtin (1969) and Davidson (1961) are mines of information—the former
on the transportation and distribution of slaves in the New World and the latter on
the complex trade partnerships between Europeans and Africans in Africa. The plantation regimes of the Western Hemisphere have been abundantly described and analyzed, but a few works stand out as classics. Tannenbaum's (1947) comparison of the
legal status of slaves in the English and Iberian colonies, Freyre's (1963.1964) accounts
of Brazilian slavery, Mellafe's (1975) little introduction to slavery in Latin America,
and the works of David B. Davis (1970), Elkins (1968), Fogel and Engerman (1974),
Genovese (1965, 1969a, 1974) and Stampp (1964) on North American slavery are all
3xtremely informative. There are edited collections by Foner and Genovese (1969),
Engerman and Genovese (1975) and Pescatello (1975)—all three of which contain
>apers on several countries of the Western Hemisphere.

7
MIDDLEMAN MINORITIES

Every country, it is often said, has "its Jews." Turkey has Armenians and
Greeks; West Africa has Lebanese; East Africa has Indians and Pakistani;
Egypt has Copts; Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, Vietnam and Thailand have the Chinese. The list of these "Jews of. . ." is a long one and so
is the bibliography of works concerning them (Blalock, 1967; Bonacich,
1973; Delf, 1963; D. P. Ghai and Y. P. Ghai, 1970; Gary Hamilton, 1978;
Schermerhorn, 1970; Turner and Bonacich, 1978; van den Berghe, 1975a).
What makes such culturally unrelated groups appear so similar to each other
in a wide range of societies? What do they share to make them behave in
such seemingly like ways?
There are three main, possible sources of similarity:
1. The intrinsic characteristics of these groups themselves.
2. The nature of the larger societies in which they live.
3. The particular economic niche which these groups occupy in their respective societies.
Before I try to answer the puzzling question of why culturally diverse
groups tend to behave similarly in many different societies, I shall try to
identify the main features of the middleman minority and, thereby, to construct an ideal type of the social situation in which middleman minorities
find themselves. In doing so, we must keep in mind that an ideal type is
not an accurate description of any particular situation but rather an analytical distillation of the common elements of a whole range of situations.
From these empirical generalizations, interrelationships and causality are
then inferred.*
*Any list of characteristics of an ideal type raises the problem of empirical approximation of
actual groups to the ideal type. Often, a given group lacks, or only imperfectly represents, one
(continued)

138
AN IDEAL TYPE OF THE MIDDLEMAN MINORITY SITUATION

As a general definition, I shall call a "middleman minority" (MM) any
ethnically distinct group that specializes in the selling of goods or skills.
Such a broad definition tells us practically nothing about the conditions
that bring such groups into existence. Indeed, there is a cluster of characteristics that are remarkably uniform from society to society—conducive to
the formation of middleman minorities. I shall group these characteristics
into the three categories suggested earlier:

Characteristics of Middleman Minority (MM) Groups
1. MMs are not native to the country or area where they reside. They arise
from immigration, not conquest, and they are usually voluntary immigrants. MMs do not generally come from groups that have been enslaved, although they are not uncommonly descendants of indentured
laborers. Often they come of their own free will, attracted by economic
prospects in the country of destination or propelled by destitution out
of their country of origin.
2. MMs are characterized by strong extended families, usually of the patrilineal, virilocal type. The authority structure of these families is
strongly patriarchal and seniority-based, and networks of nepotism are
extensive and actively maintained, even over long distances. It is not
uncommon for familistic ties to be maintained even across oceans.
3. As the very term indicates, MMs constitute a minority of the population
of their host country, often a small minority (less than 10% or even 5%
of the total).
4. MMs tend to be endogamous.
5. MMs tend to be culturally enclosed with their own set of institutions
(voluntary associations, places of worship and entertainment, merchant
and artisan guilds, schools, etc.).
6. MMs are often spatially segregated in urban ghettoes.
7. As a consequence of characteristics 2, 4, 5 and 6, MMs generally assimilate and acculturate more slowly into their host societies than other
immigrant groups.
8. The class status of MMs is generally that of an urban petty bourgeoisie,
appreciably better off than the majority of the population, though often
far from wealthy.
(continued)
or more of the characteristics of the ideal type. For instance, while MMs are generally not indigenous, the Copts of Egypt are. Sometimes most members of a MM do not engage in the classical
MM occupations (retail trade, skilled crafts, specialized labor-intensive services), but are instead
peasants or ordinary workers. Such is or was the case of South African Indians and of Armenians
in Turkey. Yet, when a visible minority of them are found in middlemen occupations, the MM
stereotypes are readily extended to all members of the group, irrespective of occupation. Visibility
(through cultural distinctiveness and residential segregation) of a MM is at least as important in
determining its treatment as its occupational distribution. Stereotypy is as readily extended to
"positive" traits as to "negative" ones. For instance, not all Jews are smart, but the overrepresentation of a minority of Jews among intellectuals, academics and professionals easily gives the
impression that Jews tend to outsmart Gentiles. This stereotype, incidentally, is generally shared
by both Jews and Gentiles. "Polish jokes" in the United States originate in Eastern European
Jewish jokes stereotyping local Gentiles (often Poles) as stupid. Slyness, cunning, and intelligence
are qualities often attributed to MMs, and accepted by MMs as part of their self-image.

139
9. Politically, MMs are often powerless because of their minority status
and their cultural marginality and therefore vulnerable to attack. Such
wealth as they have is not readily convertible into power.
10. MMs often possess certain skills, such as specialized crafts or mercantile
organization, which are scarce in the rest of the population.
11. MMs frequently exhibit values that Weber (1958) associated with the
"Protestant Ethic": frugality, thrift, hard work, postponement of gratification and lack of ostentation.

Characteristics of the Host Societies
1. MMs tend to immigrate into complex, stratified, agrarian societies.
2. The economy of these societies is one of mercantile capitalism with
well-established markets, money circulation and trade. Indeed, the best
opportunities are found in a market economy in the process of expansion into hitherto unmonetized primitive exchange economies.
3. MMs usually find themselves in plural societies, i.e. societies containing
sharply distinct ethnies, each with its own set of autonomous institutions but linked in a common polity and economy (Furnivall, 1948; Leo
Kuper and M. G. Smith, 1969; Schermerhorn, 1970; M. G. Smith, 1965a;
Smooha, 1975; van den Berghe, 1973b). MMs constitute merely one
group in a congeries of ethnies.
4. As in the case in most plural societies, MMs typically find themselves
ruled by an autocratic government dominated by one ethnic group. Such
are colonial societies or other imperial states that have grown from
conquest.
5. The state frequently imposes a set of special legal restrictions on MMs.
Laws governing immigration, land ownership, access to high-status positions, taxation and trade often discriminate against MMs.
6. MMs are generally the object of much hostility in their host society.
They are subject to a "competitive" type of prejudice and are despised
by both the ruling class above them and the masses of natives below
them (van den Berghe, 1978a). They are accused of being clannish,
underhanded, dishonest, sly, disloyal, greedy, avaricious, exploitative
and unassimilable—in short, dangerously clever and perilously alien.

Characteristics of the Economic Niche Filled by MMs
1. As indicated by the term, MMs are in a middleman position. They are
typically much poorer than the ruling class, but much richer than the
mass of natives. Their function is to act as intermediaries in a market
economy, as sellers of specialized services and finished products, as
buyers of raw materials, as importers and exporters of goods, as money
lenders and so on. They tend to fill intercalary positions opened up by
a market economy between rulers and ruled.
2. MMs are especially likely to fill occupations that require only a modicum of capital (since their material resources are typically limited, at
least initially), but that are labor intensive and require special skills
scarce in the majority of the population. Among these skills are specialized crafts catering to luxury goods (goldsmithing, jewelry making),
literacy, bookkeeping, an understanding of market forces and organi-

140
zation of trade, distribution and credit—not to mention the complex
skills of manipulating customers and political masters developed
through urban experience.
3. MMs owe much of their success to their ability to harness nepotism in
the service of capitalism. Their economic organization is based on the
systematic mobilization of unpaid family labor in family businesses
and of nepotism in employment, extension of credit, supply and distribution of goods, and so on. The success formula of applying kin
selection to mercantile capitalism is not unique to MMs. The family
firm is found in many other groups as well. But the cultural and physical
enclaving of MMs facilitates the extension of nepotism from the extended family to the wider network of the MM as a whole.
THE MIDDLEMAN'S PREDICAMENT; WHOSE FAULT IS IT?
So far, I have simply listed the main recurrent features of MM situations
without suggesting any order of precedence or causality between them. The
predicament of MMs is obvious. No other type of ethnic group is in such
a perilous, vulnerable and defenseless position as the MM. No other groups
are as frequently the victims of pogroms, expulsions, confiscations of property, discriminatory taxation and even wholesale genocide. In the catalogue
of human bestiality to man, MMs almost invariably appear as victims: Jews
in Europe, Armenians in Turkey, Indians in Uganda, the "boat people" of
Vietnam (who are mostly ethnic Chinese), the Chinese in Indonesia and
many other such MMs have been repeatedly victimized throughout human
history.
Indeed, the MM is the ideal scapegoat. It is defined as alien and therefore
beyond the protective sphere of extended nepotism that includes the native
population. MMs are often exterminated or mistreated without a whisper
of protest in the general population and, indeed, often with active support.
The small size of the MM makes it powerless and therefore safe to attack,
especially when it is concentrated in vulnerable urban ghettoes. MMs are
often wealthy enough to excite the envy of the masses and to make their
plunder profitable to the rulers—yet too poor to capture the reins of power.
In fact, they are pariah capitalists, hated for their wealth, mistrusted for
their alienness, despised for their weakness, excluded from politics, rejected
from civil society and tolerated only as long as they serve a need.v
A MM can do no right. If it retreats into the protective cocoon of ethnic
isolation, it is accused of clannishness. If it seeks assimilation, it is pushy.
If it attempts to demonstrate its loyalty to the state, that behavior is ascribed
to opportunism. If it keeps out of politics, it is disloyal. Economic success,
thrift, hard work and family loyalty, which are deemed admirable qualities
in others, are considered sins for MMs. What is good management, fair
profit, fair return on investment, initiative and free enterprise in the native
capitalist becomes greed, usury, unfair competition, underhandedness and
exploitation in the pariah capitalist.
MMs are invaluable to ruling classes because they create capital, offer a
range of valuable services that other groups are either unwilling or unable

141
to provide as cheaply, are a source of taxation, credit or bribery money,
modernize the economy and extend markets for goods, and generally energize the economy that the ruling classes parasitize. At the same time, the
hostility directed at them by the masses makes MMs ideal scapegoats for
anything that goes wrong. Jews in medieval Europe, for example, have been
accused of committing not only economic crimes, like usury, hoarding and
speculation, but also civil and religious crimes, like ritual murders, the
poisoning of wells, witchcraft, the spreading of plague epidemics and the
like. To the Nazis, the Jews were involved in a worldwide conspiracy that
was at once Bolshevik and capitalist. The "Elders of Zion" were an international consortium of banquiers, bent on spreading atheistic communism.
Where a MM can be implicated, prejudices are so blinding that no amount
of absurdity detracts from credibility.
Inevitably, moralistic judgments about MMs have invaded the social science literature. The sympathies of many liberal social scientists have often
gone to the MMs as defenseless groups, and the behavior of these groups
has widely been interpreted as adaptive reactions to the severe constraints
under which MMs have found themselves (D. P. Ghai and Y. P. Ghai, 1970;
van den Berghe, 1975a). Thus, cultural encapsulation, clannishness, nepotism, deviousness, failure to assimilate, divided loyalties and other alleged
sins of MMs have been widely interpreted as defensive reactions against
hostility and discrimination in the host society. Some more radical social
scientists, however, disturbed by the capitalist features of MMs, have suggested that the hostility of the host society to MMs is, at least, in part
attributable to the values and the behavior of these groups, such as their
"sojourner mentality" (Bonacich, 1973).
As usual, moralism does little to advance understanding of complex behavior. Little purpose is served by ascribing guilt and judgments of guilt or
innocence change with shifts in ideological fads. Thus, the proverbial "failure to assimilate" of MMs is a sin in countries dominated by an assimilationist ideology and a virtue where pluralism is the official line.* Clearly,
the behavior of MMs and of other groups in their host societies are interrelated (Turner and Bonacich, 1978). In the last analysis, individuals act in
the furtherance of their interests, and differential behavior at the group level
is a function of differential group position in the society's political and
economic structure.
Applied to MM situations, this simple utilitarian paradigm explains both
the treatment and the behavior of MMs principally in terms of the economic
niche they occupy. Structural conditions of the host society create the niche
for a foreign entrepreneurial class, while structural characteristics of certain
ethnies predispose certain groups to occupy MM roles. Given the existence
of the niche and the presence of a group with the necessary skills and
attributes to fill it, the "competitive" type of ethnic relations characteristic
Mncidentally, an ideology of cultural pluralism is not necessarily associated with a liberal,tolerant
political regime, nor assimilationism with intolerance and tyranny. South Africa, for instance,
has a clear policy of cultural pluralism, despite being one of the world's most racist and illiberal
regimes.

142
of MM situations is highly likely to develop irrespective of the specific
values and ideologies of either the host society or the MM group.
When they find themselves in MM situations, Jews, Chinese, Lebanese,
Armenians, Indians, Pakistanis, Greeks and Ibos develop surprisingly similar traits. Conversely, the same groups put in different situations begin to
behave in ways radically distinct from their previous stereotypes. Jews in
the diaspora, for instance, frequently remark how "un-Jewish" Sabras (Israeli-born Jews) are. The same group of Askenazic Jews will drastically
modify its behavior depending on whether it lives in a stetJ in Poland or
a kibbutz in Israel. The difference is one of being a despised minority in a
hostile country or a triumphant conqueror in a state one dominates. In both
cases, individuals behave so as to maximize their fitness. Different settings
dictate different strategies and produce drastically different outcomes.
HOW THE ECONOMIC NICHE CREATES
MIDDLEMAN BEHAVIOR
Let us look more analytically at the dynamics of the MM situation. First,
let us define more precisely the nature of the economic niche filled by MMs.
Basically MMs interpose themselves between a ruling class and the mass
of the population by performing roles that the upper class does not want
to perform and for which the lower class lack special skills, capital or other
advantages. Those roles are often, but not always, mercantile. They frequently involve providing, distributing and marketing goods and services
in a preindustrial economy with an expanding market and monetary system.
Classical MM occupations are the import-export trade, retail and wholesale
shopkeeping, money lending, buying and reselling of cash crops, specialized
craft production in owner-operated cottage industries, specialized laborintensive services such as restaurants and laundries and the provision of
transport facilities (mule trains, buses and trucks). Most of these forms of
entrepreneurship are started with little capital and are initially very laborintensive. With time, some MMs become wealthy and control larger, better
capitalized businesses such as banks, large import-export firms, chains of
wholesale and retail businesses, shipping or bus lines and warehousing,
milling or manufacturing establishments, but large-scale capitalism is the
exception. Labor-intensive, limited-capital, petty entrepreneurship is the
rule.
Another set of roles sometimes occupied by MMs are clerical, administrative and technical ones in expanding public and private bureaucracies,
such as railway employees, petty civil servants and the like. Both these
bureaucratic occupations and the more traditional entrepreneurial ones become a monopoly of MMs only to the extent that they are not desirable to
members of the ruling class or accessible (for lack of skills, capital or opportunities) to the lower classes.
The most fertile ground for MMs are colonial or imperial systems in which
the ruling class, which is often a non-native conquering group, extends its

143

domination and its market system over a native population that initially
lacks the skills to fill a broad middle range of occupations. If the conquering
group is too small to fill these intermediate-level occupations from its own
ranks or finds the rewards of these occupations too meager and the work
too hard, it welcomes MMs to fill the niche. The native population is often
initially unsuitable for a variety of reasons: it is not literate; it is not urban
and therefore lacks familiarity with a monetized market economy; it lacks
capital and access to credit; it cannot effectively draw on the unpaid work
of relatives; or it does not possess the requisite linguistic skills to act as
middlemen.
MMs can also successfully infiltrate settled societies where the ruling
class is native, especially if they bring in new skills or products, but in
settled societies, the middle tier of service and mercantile occupations is
much more likely to have been gradually filled by natives. Therefore, opportunities for MMs are much more limited, unless the native population
imposes on itself some self-inflicted restrictions such as the prohibition of
usury in medieval Christianity and Islam that created a niche for Jews. The
expanding conquest society with an alien ruling class and a multiplicity of
native subjects is a much more likely prospect for a MM, especially if the
conquered societies had no native merchant class before their incorporation
into the new imperial system.
It must be emphasized that, initially, commercial opportunities for MMs
are often quite marginal. The native population is typically extremely poor,
produces little surplus, has little or no cash and is geographically inaccessible. There are great difficulties of climatic adaptation, of transport and
communication, of learning new languages and of obtaining credit. The
overhead costs of inventory are high, and the volume of trade is low and
erratic. Customers expect credit and are slow to repay. Many businesses can
only be kept afloat through long hours of hard work by all the members of
the family.
If the familistic mode of production often makes the difference between
the success or failure of these precarious small enterprises, it follows that
groups with a strong network of extended family ties and with a strong
patriarchal authority structure to keep these extended families together in
the family business have a strong competitive advantage in middleman
occupations over groups lacking these characteristics. This explains the
prevalence of groups with patrilineal, virilocal, extended families and strong
seniority-based authority in MM roles and, conversely, the absence in these
roles of groups where kin ties have been disrupted by a history of slavery,
or of groups characterized by a high degree of individualism, by small
nuclear families and by a relatively egalitarian family structure.
Indeed, the nepotism so crucial to the success of the family firm is often
extended to the entire ethny. In their precarious position, MMs have to make
the best possible use of resources and, therefore, extensively resort to ethnic
nepotism as sources of employment, credit, transport facilities, intelligence
about market conditions and so on.

144
MMs are generally welcomed, at least initially, by ruling classes of plural
societies because they perform cheaply many useful functions. They often
extend trade beyond the urban areas and thereby open up new markets for
manufactured goods produced by the colonial power. They modernize transport, stimulate the economy and bring the native population into closer
control by, and into dependence on, the colonial government. They help
staff cheaply and efficiently the lower ranks of the bureaucracy and provide
a pool of useable skills before these can be developed in the native population. Most importantly, they serve the useful function of deflecting the
hostility of the subject population from the rulers. Since MMs deal more
directly and frequently with the masses than the upper class, and since
many of these encounters take place in a context of cultural differences and
misunderstandings and involve conflicts of interest, it is little wonder that
MMs become primary targets of hostility by the native masses. The MMs
are generally seen as the most direct exploiters and cheats and are blamed
for the system of domination they did nothing to create.
To the extent that MMs become more successful and expand the scope
of their economic activities into domains where they begin to compete with
the ruling class, they also become the object of virulent prejudice from the
top. In a sense, the more economically secure a MM becomes, the more
politically precarious its position grows. If it grows wealthy, it becomes the
target not only of envy from the bottom, but also of confiscation, discrimination, expulsion or even extermination from the top. Success is thus frequently fraught with danger, and it must be hidden. MMs basically survive
by keeping a low profile, by remaining as inconspicuous as possible, by
being unostentatious about wealth, by staying out of politics (at least overtly), and by adopting a conciliatory, nonaggressive stance.
THE VICIOUS CIRCLE OF ETHNIC RELATIONS IN MIDDLEMAN
MINORITY SITUATIONS
It is easy to see how the very nature of the economic niche and its resultant
pattern of interaction creates "typical" MM behavior. The latter in turn
reinforces stereotypes and heightens hostility against MMs by host populations. Hostile reactions further accentuate MM behavior, and an almost
inescapable vicious circle of ethnic relations ensues. Alien merchant communities often grow slowly and inconspicuously at first. A few enterprising
sailors and merchants arrive in a foreign land. They discover an opportunity
for trade and settle down. If they survive the first trial period, they send
money home to bring wives, children and relatives. Little by little, the word
spreads at home that so and so is doing well in a distant land and more
undertake the journey. On arrival, they naturally turn for help to relatives,
friends or friends of friends. Soon the nucleus of a little ethny-in-the-diaspora is formed. Fellow ethnics stick together for protection, mutual aid,
comfort and sociability. Where else can one turn in a strange land?
Little ghettoes quickly and easily form, because a trading community has

145
no better place to locate than at the heart of urban settlements, in harbors,
on crossroads and so on. Trade dictates location, and economy, convenience
and safety make for combining the place of business and the place of residence. Since money is scarce, there is a strong premium for relying for help
on the unpaid labor of wives and kinsmen. Since the shop is run as a family
business, what better arrangement than for the family to be housed behind
or above the store? You save on housing, are close to your place of work
and are protected against theft. Since trade attracts more trade, shops locate
close to each other and, if most traders happen to belong to the same alien
ethnic group, you have the nucleus of an MM ghetto. Add a schoolhouse
and an exotic-looking temple or community hall, and the place acquires a
strikingly alien character that heightens the visibility of its population.
Trading anywhere, but especially in poor and foreign countries, is a
chancy proposition, and success in it requires a combination of complex
skills. One must learn the local language and culture, understand the economics of the marketplace with all the intricacies of supply and demand,
credit, interest, risk, overhead, inventory, volume of trade, profit margin
and so on. One must meet competition; correctly assess (and often create)
demand for goods; adapt to the purchasing behavior of the natives; know
when to extend credit and when not; deal with government officials whom
one must learn how and when to bribe, cajole or manipulate; negotiate one's
way through the bureaucratic red tape of trade licences, import duties, sales
taxes, health and fire regulations, building permits, zoning laws, and soon.
All this requires skills of literacy, bookkeeping and reckoning, considerable

astuteness and acumen in understanding both the market system and the
intricacies of social relationships, and great adaptability to local diet, climate
and customs. Even though the MM may not assimilate to the host society,
it must learn a great deal about it to survive, and, therefore, it must be q u i t e

adaptable.
Frugality, thrift and industriousness are initially imposed by the very
difficulty of starting a business and of gradually accumulating capital for
inventory and expansion. When success comes, it is good public relations
to remain as inconspicuous as possible and to hide one's wealth. Nobody
likes to see the rich alien merchant flaunting his affluence in a poor country.
In dealing with the natives, it is best to be blandly affable but to hide one's
feelings and opinions. With the powers that be, one is best subservient and
sycophantic. Toward all, except fellow ethnics, one must be coolly calculating, ever alert and watchful, because one is always acutely aware of the
precariousness of one's position. One feels caught between the fury and
envy of the poor from whom one lives and the rapaciousness and whim of
the powerful on whose sufferance one depends.
Against these multiple dangers, one develops nepotism as self-defense;
one hedges one's bets by sending money abroad in case of emergency; one
keeps one's ties with home and with other kinsmen in the diaspora as a
safety net; one bribes for protection and then tries to evade taxes to be able
to afford bribery; and one adapts sale tactics to the customers' behavior. For

146
instance, one raises asking prices in expectation of haggling, one uses short
weights because one knows that customers like to think they are getting
something for nothing, and therefore expect a "gift" on top of their purchase,
and so on.*
All these adaptive behaviors earn one a reputation for stinginess, dishonesty, clannishness, deviousness, disloyalty and unassimibility. But one had
no real choice. Even if one wanted to assimilate, one would be rejected.
Attempts to do so would be regarded as "cheekiness" or "pushiness" by
those above and insincerity or opportunism by those below. Participation
in open politics is also a closed avenue. If the government is autocratic,
MMs are excluded by virtue of being alien, or represented only through a
system of indirect rule which reinforces their marginality by giving them
separate communal status. If there is a parliamentary democracy, MMs are
either disfranchised by citizenship or outright racist legislation—or too
small in numbers to prevent discriminatory treatment. In short, it is extremely difficult to assimilate into a society that rejects you, to demonstrate
loyalty to a state that discriminates against you, and to show trust and
confidence in people who hate and threaten you.
Even MM groups that do achieve a large measure of assimilation are not
safe from persecution, as shown by the tragic history of German Jewry. The
majority of German Jews felt so German and so assimilated that they were
long lulled into a sense of security. Notwithstanding some acts of desperate
last-minute resistance in the Warsaw ghetto, in the Sobibor, Treblinka and
Auschwitz concentration camps, and in a number of partisan groups (Steinberg, 1978), hundreds of thousands of people walked into the gas chambers,
not believing that such a thing could ever happen to them.
Similarly, all protestations of loyalty to the United States did not save
second- and third-generation Americans of Japanese descent from being sent
*Any attempt to characterize the behavior of a group inevitably raises the problem of the validity
of ethnic group stereotypes, and invites accusations that the writer accepts such stereotypes. I
am not for a moment suggesting that MMs are any more clannish, nepotistic or deceitful than
anyone else. Rather, I am suggesting two things. First, because MMs tend to be ostracized, powerless minorities, their general human propensity to behave selfishly in the furtherance of their
individual interests is socially reinforced by a greater need for self-defense. Second, because MMs
are generally alien and visible, behavior that is generally human and situationally elicited will
tend to be stereotyped and ascribed to ethnic peculiarities.
Thus, the propensity to cheat (in the general sense of seeking to maximize benefits through
deceit) is universal in an intelligent animal like man. and is certainly rampant in business
transactions, but, when the MM merchant cheats, his behavior will be "explained" in terms of
ethnic stereotypes. The issue, therefore, is not the validity of the stereotype. Most stereotypes
have some experiential basis. Of course, members of MMs cheat, are nepotistic, and so on. They
would not be human if they did not behave that way. The essence of stereotypy and prejudice
is not the falsity of the belief, but the misattribution of the observed behavior to particularistic
rather than universalistic causes.
Incidentally, the sociobiological approach to human behavior, developed here, far from supporting racism or ethnism as it is often alleged, explicitly resorts to a more universalistic level
of explanation than is generally practiced in the social sciences. It seeks to explain behavior in
the broadest possible terms, which means at least in pan-human terms, and quite often at an even
broader level (e.g. at the levels of primates, mammals, vertebrates or all animals). Thus, sociobiology. through its reductionist strategy of seeking explanations for behavior at the most general
level, is the very antithesis of racism or ethnism.

147
to concentration camps and despoiled of their property. The supposedly
"democratic" nature of their government did not protect them against the
most blatant forms of racial discrimination. MMs are not safe under any
political regime. Wealth is not a source of security. "Weak money" is one
of the characteristics of MMs who are not allowed to convert their wealth
into power. Wealth makes MMs, if anything, more vulnerable to exploitation, confiscation or expulsion. It can be used for bribery or ransom, but
often MMs can do little more than buy their way out of discrimination,
confiscation or even annihilation as some Jews did in Nazi Germany or
more recently ethnic Chinese in Vietnam.

ASIANS IN EAST AFRICA: A CASE STUDY
The saga of Asian immigrants to the former British territories of Kenya,
Uganda and Tanganyika (now Tanzania) is well documented and represents
a type-case of the MM situation (Bharati, 1972; Delf, 1963; D. P. Ghai and
Y. P. Ghai, 1970; Gregory, 1971; Hollingsworth, 1960; Mangat, 1969; Morris,
1956; van den Berghe, 1975a). Asians have had both political and trade
contacts with the entire coast of East Africa from the Horn to Mozambique
for approximately 3000 years, and the Arab influence was dominant on that
coast and its off-shore islands, such as Zanzibar and Pemba, for several
centuries before European conquest. Indeed, in the early 19th century, the
East African slave trade made Zanzibar the capital of a large empire ruled
by Arabs from Oman. Those Asians, however, were a ruling class—not a
middleman minority.
It was European conquest at the turn of the 20th century that turned the
Asians into a MM. The great bulk of the 350,000-odd Asians who, until the
1960s lived in the three territories of former British East Africa, came after
1895. This was the date when the British started building the Uganda Railway to link Mombasa, Nairobi and Kampala. Local African labor was deemed
"unreliable," so the British government brought in some 32,000 "coolies"
from India on indenture. About 2500 of them died, principally of blackwater
fever; some 23,000 returned to India and some 7000 settled in East Africa
(D. P. Ghai and Y. P. Ghai, 1970). During the construction of the railway,
some Indians began to come in as merchants and to establish dukas (shops)
along the railway, initially to cater for fellow Indians. After the end of the
railway construction, that merchant immigration from India continued until,
by the 1920s, virtually the entire retail trade of East Africa was monopolized
by Indians.
Many of the indentured Indians who remained became railway employees,
petty government clerks and skilled craftsmen, as they possessed many
skills as yet scarce in the native African population and useful to the rapidly
expanding British colonial administration. Many Indians were literate,
spoke some English and were somewhat familiar with Western culture
through prior exposure to British rule in India, were accustomed to urban
life and a market economy, and were knowledgeable about machinery and

148
industrial technology. Those were all signal advantages that gave them a
great competitive advantage over the Africans.
Except along the narrow coastal strip where the natives belonged to the
urban, literate, Muslim culture of the Swahili speakers, East African nations
were either nomadic pastoralists like the Masai, the Somali or the Turkana,
or horticulturalists like the Kikuyu, the Baganda, the Luo and many others.
The centralized kingdom of southern Uganda (Bunyoro, Ankole and Buganda) were more complex societies than those of the interior of Kenya and
Tanganyika, and in Uganda the Indian monopoly over trade and middleechelon clerical and craft occupations was not as sweeping as in Tanganyika
and Kenya. Nevertheless, for about 50 years, Indians came to control nearly
all of the trade and of the middle-level occupations and thus to constitute
an urban bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie in a rigid three-tiered colonial
society.
A brief sketch of the classical colonial society of British East Africa is
necessary here to place the Indian community in its total context. At the
apex of the social, political and economic pyramid were the Europeans
(overwhelmingly British after the German defeat in World War I when Tanganyika passed from German to British administration). The Europeans
monopolized the senior ranks of the civil service and the officer ranks of
the colonial army, i.e. all the command posts of the colonial regime. In
addition, they occupied, at least initially, most of the university-level posts
in the professions (engineering, law and medicine) and the key managerial
positions in large transport and business undertakings (banks, railways and
export-import firms). In the Kenya Highlands and in some parts of Northern
Tanganyika, there were also some white settlers with large ranches and
plantations of sisal, tea, coffee and other tropical export crops, using an
African labor force. These settlers, although they never numbered more than
a fraction of 1% of the East African population, intended at one stage to
make Africa their permanent home, therefore clashing with the British Colonial Office after World War II when it became increasingly clear to metropolitan Britain that independence was inevitable.
This thinly scattered European minority, numbered barely 90,000 out of
a total East African population of some 25.1 million in 1962, i.e. just before
(for Kenya) or after (for Tanzania and Uganda) independence. More than
half of them (56,000) lived in Kenya, mostly in and around the capital of
Nairobi, center of the "White Highlands," but, even there, they were outnumbered by Africans at least 20 to one. Europeans lived in a gilded ghetto
of their own making. In every city of any size, they reserved for themselves
segregated residential areas where they built large, comfortable villas and
were served by African domestics. They send their children to all-white
schools, staffed by white teachers. They imposed racial segregation in hotels,
restaurants, bars, public transport, cinemas, theaters—in every conceivable
facility, public or private. Indeed, social apartheid, at least in Kenya, was
as rigid as in South Africa. Europeans also had a privileged legal status, and
the entire governmental and legal apparatus buttressed the racial supremacy

149
of the whites, whether colonial officials or private settlers. For example, in
the colonial councils advisory to the governors, the Europeans, like the
Asians and later the Africans, were represented as a separate community,
but in numbers vastly disproportionate to their percentage in the population.
In 1945, for example, the Legislative Council in Kenya had 41 members of
whom 33 were Europeans, 5 Asians, 2 Arab and 1 African (Tandon, 1970).
Economically, the standard of living of Europeans was so vastly greater
than that of the Africans that there was virtually no overlap in their income
or wealth distributions. The poorest white was still richer than all but a
handful of Africans. There are no accurate figures for that period, but European per capita income in East Africa was at least 20 times that of Africans
($50 to $75 a year is an approximate estimate of the latter in late colonial
times). To be white meant to live in a modern masonry house with several
rooms, extensive furniture and appliances, a staff of three to five African
servants and, generally after World War II, a motorcar, electricity (supplied
by one's own engine in the rural areas) and other modern amenities. Even
in the rural areas where some of the amenities were lacking, white farmers
lived baronially, if not royally, on estates of hundreds of hectares, surrounded by entire villages of African workers and servants.
Naturally, the European community was almost totally endogamous, although white bachelors often took black mistresses. The latter were completely excluded from European society, however, as were their mulatto
children. These liaisons were socially frowned upon and were tolerated
only for bachelors. Most Europeans came to East Africa with their wives
and children, especially in Kenya where the highland climate was considered ideal for European settlement.
Leisure-time activities were also entirely segregated by race. The whites
attended their tea parties at Government House, their Sunday afternoon
horse races, their polo, cricket and bowling matches, their classical music
concerts, their steeple chases and so on, among themselves, although always
served by a numerous staff of African domestics. In Nairobi and environs,
the British minority even managed to stamp out local vegetation and introduce a tropical version of the English countryside—fake Tudor manors,
manicured lawns and all. Indeed, much of Nairobi and the Kenya Highlands
still bear the stamp of a tropical, Victorian England, graceful and aristocratic
but incredibly incongruous in the African landscape.
At the bottom of the social pyramid of East African colonial society were,
of course, the Africans. They made up about 98% of the region's 25 million
inhabitants in 1962, and over 90% of them were either pastoralists moving
across vast stretches of semiarid savannah with their flocks of cattle and
goats, or poor subsistence farmers eking out a meager livelihood from small
plots cultivated by swidden agriculture. Overpopulation grew worse and
worse throughout the colonial period, as some groups, especially the Kikuyu, were dispossessed by the white farmers, and as European preventive
medicine caused a population explosion. Up to one-tenth of the African
population gradually migrated to the urban centers and the white farms to

150
become mostly a poorly paid urban or rural proletariat. In the cities, they
established vast overcrowded, unsanitary, racially segregated shanty towns
where they erected flimsy corrugated iron shacks that often lacked all public
amenities like electricity, running water and sewers. A few were lucky
enough to be housed somewhat better by their European or Asian employers,
but most lived under abject conditions, far worse because of overcrowding,
filth, unemployment and crime, than many of the rural areas from whence
they came.
Yet the cities were a magnet because only there (and on the white farms)
could one work for wages with which to pay taxes and to buy goods (including food) that increasingly became necessities. As subsistence agriculture declined in self-sufficiency because of overpopulation, and as the entire
economy became increasingly monetized and opened up to trade goods,
Africans became increasingly dependent on the "modern" sector of the
economy controlled by Europeans and Asians. But, in that modern sector,
their social mobility was almost totally blocked by both the European and
the Asian population. Even semiskilled occupations, such as clerical and
artisanal jobs, which in other colonies without MMs were open to natives,
were often preempted by Asians in East Africa, especially in Kenya. So
urban Africans were almost entirely confined, if they could find employment
at all, to menial jobs as domestic servants in European or Asian households,

stevedores and day laborers, unskilled construction workers, and policemen,

night-watchmen and soldiers in the colonial army. Local industry was limited to a few small firms, mostly Asian owned, and offered little employment.
Entrepreneurial outlets were almost entirely closed by Asian competition,
so African trade was practically limited to the selling of fresh produce,
small-scale hawking and peddling and some illegal brewing of beer. Opportunities for Africans were somewhat better in Uganda and Tankanyika
where the European and the Indian population were proportionately about
half as large as in Kenya, but, even there, Africans constantly felt that their
"advancement" was blocked. Even though they were the victim of a colonial
system imposed by Europeans, the man who was directly perceived as doing
the blocking and the exploitation was, almost invariably, the Indian immediately above the African, rather than the lofty, distant European.
A few Africans, lucky enough to attend mission schools and become
literate in English, gradually entered the lower reaches of the professions,
mostly as teachers and nurses, catering to other Africans, for racially discriminatory pay, in segregated institutions. Until shortly before independence, the social apex that an African could hope to reach was to be an
underpaid teacher in an African school. From that small mission-educated
class came the leadership of the independence movements that eventually
overthrew the colonial regime. Kenyatta, Nyerere and Obote were all products of mission schools.
Thus, this was the colonial matrix into which Indians implanted themselves as an intermediate stratum. In 1962, Indians numbered some 90,000

151
in Tanzania, 80,000 in Uganda and 180,000 in Kenya (Bharati, 1972). In
East Africa as a whole, they outnumbered Europeans by about four to one,
but they were still a bare 1% of the population of Tanganyika and Uganda,
and 2% of that of Kenya.
It was, of course, their relatively small number that permitted East African
Indians to be as economically successful as they were. East Africa could not
have produced enough surplus to keep a much larger Asian merchant population, but it did produce enough to secure for its middleman minority a
standard of living some six times greater than the African mean, though
three times lower than the European mean (Delf, 1963; D. P. Ghai and Y.
P. Ghai, 1970). On the eve of Kenya independence in 1962, only 0.5% of
African taxpayers reported incomes of more than £400 per annum, compared
to 68.4% of the Asians and 92.2% of the Europeans (D. P. Ghai, 1970, p.
109). Most dukawallas (as the owners of the ubiquitous rural dry goods
stores were known) lived frugally and modestly by European standards.
They were typically housed in crowded back rooms or above their stores,
in quarters that Europeans would have considered cramped, dark and unattractive. Yet, seen through African eyes, they were affluent. They live in
large masonry buildings, often employed a couple of African servants, and
frequently owned such luxuries as a kerosene refrigerator or a motor car,
which would be totally inaccessible to any but a handful of Africans.
Some Asians were wealthy indeed, sufficiently so to excite the envy even
of Europeans, and, in time, a growing number of Asians began to compete
with Europeans in the professions. By far the greater number, however, were
just moderately successful retail traders who had rural dry goods stores in
distant villages, small urban shopkeepers and craftsmen or modest clerks
and petty bureaucrats on limited salaries. In short, most Asians were far too
poor (and too discriminated against) to compete seriously with Europeans,
but, in African eyes, Indians always seemed to occupy all the positions to
which an ambitious African with a moderate amount of Western education
and a little starting capital might aspire.

Despite their relatively small numbers, East African Asians were, for sev-

eral reasons, highly visible. Their skin pigmentation, appropriately intermediate on the colonial scale of color prejudice, set them off from both
Europeans and Africans. So did their distinctive style of dress, the smell of
their cooking, the sound of their language and music broadcast over the
radio, the architecture of their mosques and temples—in short, their entire
culture that was so odorously, colorfully and audibly exotic—clearly neither
African nor European.
In addition to their culture and phenotypic visibility, Indians lived in
highly conspicuous places where everybody went, namely, in the very heart
of towns. Nearly all the buildings in the main commercial streets of East
African towns, except for a few official buildings like the post office, the
police station, the jail and the court building, would be Indian-owned stores
and workshops, typically two stories high, with the extended family of the
owner living upstairs and the kitchen and toilet facilities in the backyard.

152
Also in the commercial heart of the town would be the temples and mosques,
frequently the most colorful and attractive buildings to be seen in a wide
radius. Even the dukawallas who tended distant rural shops lived in a
conspicuous place, usually a row of masonry buildings with corrugated iron
roofs alongside an open market place. Their dwellings were obviously much
bigger, better and more expensive than the mud and grass huts of native
architecture.
It is not true that Asians were inadaptable in East Africa. Nearly all Indian
men learned to speak English, and, by the second generation, both sexes
had become fluently Anglophone, while continuing to use their native
tongue (mostly Gujarati, Cutchi, Punjabi or Hindustani). Most Indians also
learned the upland Swahili pidgin which is the trade language of East Africa;
while few spoke the "correct" coastal Swahili, their fluency in "kitchen
Swahili" was often superior to that of the Europeans. The more rural Indian
shopkeepers did indeed become somewhat Africanized, while the urban
Indian became more Anglicized.
Yet, Indians lived mostly among themselves, for various reasons: they
chose to as a matter of ethnocentrism and felt culturally if not racially
superior to Africans; their economic niche led them to concentrate in the
commercial centers of towns; they were prevented by Europeans from gaining entry into the white elite; and they were hated and rejected by Africans,
at virtually all class levels. East African Indians were literally encysted as
a foreign body in the African landscape. Partly, they wanted it that way;
but even those who did not had no option. They were forced to go to their
own schools because the European schools would not admit them, and the
African schools were dominated by Christian missionaries who exerted
strong pressures to convert and were for the most part of very low quality.
Their religions (Hinduism, Sunni and Ismaelite Islam, Sikhism and Jainism)
also cut them off from both whites and blacks.
For entertainment, social life and welfare and medical services, the Asians
were also forced by colonial indifference and neglect to organize their own
voluntary associations on a communal basis. Indeed, the British colonial
administration did everything to encourage Indian communalism, as it was
compatible with their policy of dividing and ruling. The British, for example,
gave official communal representation to Asians on the advisory councils
to the British governor. In keeping with the British view of the Asians as
racially inferior to themselves but superior to the Africans, Asian representation, too, was proportionately smaller than the European, but greater than
the African one. Despite this representation in advisory bodies, Indians
were, of course, almost totally excluded from power in the three British
territories, even more so than the Africans to whom the Colonial Office
recognized at least a theoretical right to eventual self-rule. The Indians, in
British eyes, were mere interlopers.
Although, to both Europeans and Africans, Asians looked like a homogeneous group and a single community, they were nothing of the sort. It is
true that the vast majority of them came from the northwestern corner of

153
the Indian subcontinent, mostly from Gujarat and the Punjab, and thus could
be expected to be fairly homogeneous. Nevertheless, they represented in
microcosm the Indian kaleidoscope, with its multiple religious, linguistic
and caste divisions, well described by Bharati (1972). Even the gross division
into Hindu and Muslim, largely recognized by Europeans, only began to
scratch the surface of the complex splintering of Indians into tightly endogamous little subgroups of only a few thousand members each. East African Asians thus shared little more in common than a broad geographical
origin and membership in a despised, powerless, vulnerable, defenseless
group of pariah capitalists.
Not only were Indians a tiny minority of the 25 million people of East
Africa. They were an almost infinitely divided and subdivided minority.
One must see the adaptation of Indians to the MM situation against the
backdrop of this diversity and splintering. Their commercial success was
due, in good part, like that of other MMs, to their systematic application of
nepotism to a rapidly expanding market economy. They literally brought
capitalism into the vast interior of East Africa, and they did so through
complex and multiple networks of kin selection. This was not true at a
broad pan-Indian level. Indeed, there was almost no feeling of pan-Indianness among East African Asians. Even the Indian independence movement did not bridge the social chasms between caste and religious groups;
quite the opposite, it widened the H i n d u - M u s l i m gulf.

Indian enterprise was a matter of kin helping kin; extended families setting
up small family businesses and, little by little, expanding into little chains
of stores owned by kinsmen; uncles hiring nephews, cousins lending each
other money and so on. Beyond the extended families, the network of nepotism incorporated the endogamous caste and/or religious group of a few
hundred—or at most a few thousand people. Typically, the same caste or
religious subcommunity (e.g. the Patels, the Goans and the Sikhs) would
maintain much closer ties with their small group in other parts of Africa or
even in India, than with their Indian neighbors from other groups. Patterns
of endogamy perpetuated this situation.
East African Indians vividly demonstrate how tight networks of nepotism
not only can survive in complex, urban societies but can be made to serve
adaptive needs in a highly capitalistic system which is supposedly inimical
to such "irrational" constraints. Not only are kin selection and capitalism
not incompatible; the former is demonstrably a formula for success in the
latter.

EPILOGUE: THE CRISIS OF INDEPENDENCE
East African Asians were not only a type-case of MM when they successfully
adapted to the economic niche created by the European conquest of the
area. Their misfortunes since independence in Kenya (1963), Tanzania
(1961) and Uganda (1962) also poignantly illustrate the "weak money" syndrome characteristic of pariah capitalists. With the outbreak of the Kenya

154
War of Independence (the so-called "Mau Mau Rebellion" of British history
books) in the early 1950s, the handwriting on the wall was clearly to be read
for both Europeans and Asians: African political independence was inevitable. The prospect was far from enchanting for Europeans, but most of them
had really little to lose except a little prestige and, if worse came to worse,
their farms. At least in Kenya, the British managed to install a conservative,
capitalist, neocolonialist regime led by Jomo Kenyatta, whom they had, a
few years earlier, framed as a terrorist leader and imprisoned. Most Europeans stayed, retaining their privileged economic position. Once they got
over the shock of sharing their favorite bars, restaurants, hotels, cinemas
and schools with a few members of the new African political elite and of
having to "watch their language" in talking publicly to and about blacks,
they could continue their life of genteel affluence in an ideal climate. Indeed,
the white population of Kenya increased after independence, and today
Nairobi is one of the most chic and cosmopolitan European cities of Africa,
chock-full of Wabenzi of all shades of skin pigmentation.*
The Indians did not fare so well. Indian leaders shifted from the traditional, prudent attitude of staying out of politics, to supporting the African
nationalist movements, both verbally and with money. A few intellectuals
even openly identified with African aspirations and took an active part in
politics, but most leaders of Indian organizations simply repeated pledges
of allegiance to the new governments and bribed politicians, while always
expecting the worst. Anti-Indian feelings in the African population were
rampant, and these prejudices could and were in fact exploited by African
politicians. At regular intervals, Asians were admonished in speeches by
African ministers or members of parliament that they had better curb their
rapaciousness and stop being leeches on the body politic, or dire things
would happen to them.
A survey that I conducted in sociology classes at the Universities of Nairobi, Kenya, and Makarere, Uganda, in 1967-1968, indicates the depth of
anti-Asian prejudices, even in the most highly educated and articulate segment of the African population, the very elite that now governs these countries. Of a group of 129 African students, 44% regarded the contribution of
Asians to East Africa as "mostly negative," 49% regarded it as "mixed" and
only 7% as "mostly positive." Over three-fourths (77%) advocated racial
discrimination in employment in favor of Africans, irrespective of citizenship. At the same time, 71% denied that there was any racial discrimination
against Europeans and Asians in East Africa. (Interestingly, of the 24 Asian
students in the same sample, 88% thought they were being discriminated
against on racial grounds.) Asked in two separate questions what the positive
and negative traits of Asians were, 52% of the African students mentioned
only negative traits or explicitly stated that Asians did not have any positive
traits. Only two positive traits were reported by more than 10% of the
* Wabenzi, the plural of Mubenzi, is a Swahili neologism referring to drivers of Mercedes Ben
motor cars. This is a term of hostility and derision directed at Kenya's neocolonialist ruling class.

155
sample: business ability and contribution to economic development. However, 42% accused Indians of exploiting Africans, 27% of dishonesty or
deceit, 32% of clannishness and unwillingness to mix with other groups,
and 19% of superiority feelings vis-a-vis Africans.* Even the "positive"
responses were sometimes indirectly negative. Thus, one student said,
"some are honest."
Politically, East African Asians were given one option at independence.
They could either apply for citizenship of their country of residence or get
British citizenship. Approximately one-third of the Kenya and Uganda Indians, and about 80% of the Tanzania Asians chose local citizenship in the
hope of avoiding discrimination (Tandon, 1970). In the end, the option
turned out to be illusory. Those who chose African citizenship were accused
of opportunism and soon discovered that race rather than citizenship was
the bask of much government policy (as in the granting of trade licences,
hiring and promotion in the civil service and so on). At least this was the
case in capitalist Kenya, which increasingly adopted a policy of racial discrimination, called Africanization, to squeeze Asians out of trade and out
of clerical, managerial, technical and civil service jobs. First, Asians were
pushed out of rural areas; then the discrimination shifted to the urban areas.
There, the squeeze was slow and gradual because Asians were not only
merchants, but also occupied some 30 to 40% of all the key managerial,
clerical, technical, professional and skilled manual jobs. They were not
easily replaceable, and Kenya did not want to jeopardize its reputation for
being a neocolonialist, capitalist paradise. Yet, political pressures to phase
the Indians out of trade and middle-echelon jobs were irresistible.
In socialist Tanzania, President Julius Nyerere generously proclaimed that
all Tanzanians were equal, and that racial discrimination was totally unthinkable in a socialist country, but so was capitalist exploitation. Consequently Asians found themselves squeezed out qua capitalists, rather than
qua Asians, an ideological nicety that was, no doubt, lost on most of them.
In both Kenya and Tanzania, Asians are thus being pushed out gradually,
but as quickly as can be done without disrupting the economy too seriously.
In Uganda, the outcome was more drastic. When the semiliterate thug and
army boxing champ, Idi Amin, took over the country in 1971, he was not
much concerned about either ideology or economic development. He simply
expelled all Asians irrespective of citizenship. In 1972, about 80,000 Asian;
were forced to leave Uganda in a few weeks' time—without their assets. Ir
the end, it turned out that Idi Amin was giving them preferential treatment,
because he butchered an estimated quarter of a million black Ugandans
before he was overthrown by a Tanzanian military invasion in 1979.
What about those Asians who opted for British citizenship? That strategy
turned out to be disadvantageous as well. Asians thought that a British
passport, if worse came to worse, assured them entry into Britain. They
* Percentages add up to more than 100, because a number of students gave multiple responses.
The questions were entirely "open," i.e. the subjects did not check off a list of adjectives but
answered in their own words.

156
knew they would encounter considerable racial discrimination there, too,
but they felt that a mature and prosperous "democracy" like the United
Kingdom was a reasonable assurance against the Idi Amins of this world.
Unfortunately, these eminently prudent considerations were foiled by the
democratically elected British Parliament. By 1968, the denial of work permits and trading licences to Asians with British passports was creating an
exodus to Britain that was itself in the throes of racist agitation against
"Commonwealth immigration." In anticipation of Britain closing its doors,
Asian emigration out of East Africa accelerated, and the British Parliament
responded by passing a piece of legislation restricting Asian immigration.
A new law declared that there were really two classes of British passports:
those held by people with a British grandfather and others. Only holders
of the first kind of British passport had an automatic right of entry into
Britain; others would be let in on a quota basis only and would have to
queue up. The oldest "democratic" parliament in the world had used racial
criteria to deny entry to its own citizens!
Where pariah capitalists are concerned, formal democracy is no protection. Ethnic sentiments can be instantaneously mobilized in the defense of
interests or even hysterically whipped up in response to imaginary threats.
Conversely, middleman minorities have little else than nepotism on which
they can rely for self-protection in a hostile environment.
SUGGESTED READINGS
Middlemen minorities have been written about extensively in articles (Bonacich,
1973; Gary Hamilton, 1978; van den Berghe, 1975a), in textbooks (Blalock 1967;
Shibutani and Kwan, 1965) and in a number of monographs and collections of papers
dealing with a single group (Delf, 1963; Hilda Kuper, 1960), but there is no good
general book on the subject. On East African Asians dealt with in this chapter, the
best sources are Bharati (1972), Delf (1963), D. P. Ghai and Y. P. Ghai (1970) and
Mangat (1969).

8
CASTE

The concept of "caste," like that of "slavery," covers a wide range of meanings and of social phenomena, human and nonhuman. Entomologists use
the term "caste" to designate functionally and anatomically discrete morphs
of the same species of social insect (Oster and Wilson, 1978; E. O. Wilson,
1971, 1975). Thus, they speak of workers and soldiers among ants or termites as "castes." Apart from the social insects, however, the term "caste"
is usually reserved to human societies, and, clearly, the overlap of meaning
between the entomological and anthropological use of the term is limited
to a single feature: specialization in the division of labor.
Insect castes lack basic elements of what is usually called a "caste" in
human societies and, conversely, possess characteristics not found in human
castes. Caste status among social insects is not inherited, since most members of an insect colony are sterile and reproductive queens can typically
produce all castes characteristic of a given species. Such environmental
factors as diet, presence or absence of a queen or fertilization versus nonfertilization of the egg will determine whether a bee, a wasp, an ant or a
termite becomes a worker or a queen, sterile or reproductive, and female or
male. Individuals can, and sometimes do, change their caste status within
their own lifetime. Morphologically, insect castes are characterized by distinct differences in gonadal activity, body size, mandible shape and size,
and so on, which make them particularly suited to their functional specialization in the colony to which they belong. In short, insect castes are
not even good analogs, much less homologs, of human castes.

THE TWO TRADITIONS IN THE DEFINITION OF CASTE
However, whereas entomologists have a clear idea of what they mean by
"caste" in the "eusocial" insects (i.e. those that have sterile castes), social
scientists cannot agree on what they call "caste" in human societies. Many

158
books and articles have been written on human caste societies, but, the more
one reads, the more confused the issue seems to be (Berreman, 1960; Cox,
1948; de Reuck and Knight, 1967; De Vos and Wagatsuma, 1966; Dumont,
1970; Ghurye, 1952; Hsu, 1963; Hutton, 1946; Karve, 1961; Smythe, 1952;
Srinivas, 1969). So, inevitably, we must begin, as we did in the chapter on
slavery, by clarifying some of the confusion.
Basically, there are two traditions in the use of the term, "caste": there
are those, often Indianists, who would prefer to reserve the term for the
peculiar social groupings found on the Indian subcontinent, principally
among Hindus, but also in other religious communities who have been
influenced by surrounding Hindus (Cox, 1948; Dumont, 1970; Ghurye, 1952;
Hutton, 1946). The irony of their position is that the word caste, which they
would want to restrict to India, is in fact European in origin. It comes from
the Spanish and Portuguese casta, a term applied by the Iberian colonizers
in the New World to designate phenotypically distinct "racial" groups:
European, Amerindians, Africans and their intermixtures: mestizos, mulattos and zambos.
Why (East) Indianists are so eager to restrict the concept of caste to a
society where the very word is alien is puzzling. After insisting that "caste"
in all its complexities (which they delight in expounding) is unique to the
Indian subcontinent, Indianists immediately face a serious problem. They
cannot quite determine whether by caste, they mean varna or jati, two very
different concepts. The term varna (which means "color" in Sanscrit, but
probably never referred to skin color) is used to designate one of the four
broad status categories mentioned in a number of Hindu religious writings
such as the Baghavad Gita. In descending order of status, the four varna are
the Brahmins, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras. The jati, however, are the thousands of groups and subgroups into which Indian society
is subdivided and to which most Hindus are conscious of belonging. While
most jati can be assigned broadly to one of the four varna, many groups do
not fit (e.g. the harijans or "untouchables," who are below the four varna,
and the "tribals" who are altogether outside the system). It is the jati or the
subjati that is the effective social group for most purposes. The four varna
are little more than a rigid, static, oversimplified scheme superimposed by
religious literati on a much more complex, dynamic, locally diverse reality.
To be sure, the Hindu caste system is unique. The religious concepts of
karma, of dharma, or reincarnation and of ritual purity and defilement used
to rationalize it; the multiple precepts and prohibitions concerning intercaste contacts, marriage and commensality; the division of labor; the multiplicity of divisions and subdivisions between groups all make India quite
unlike any other society in the world. Indeed, to an outsider it seems more
than a little mad; even to an insider, it is so complex that no one can gain
a coherent overview of it, much less construct a rational model of it. Where
else do 600 million people divide and subdivide themselves ad infinitum
into supposedly air-tight but interdependent little groups bound by such a
multitude of rules that one is never quite sure whom one may or may not

159
touch, drink or eat with, marry or whatever. One must first ask to what
group a person belongs! And even then, it is not clear what one should do
because there are simply too many groups, too many rules and too many
disagreements.
To describe in any detail this monument to human folly and perverse
ingenuity, known as the Hindu caste system, is beyond the scope of this
book. We would have to explain why it is all right to accept fried but not
boiled food from some people, both kinds of food from others and neither
kind from some; why one must bathe if the shadow of an untouchable falls
on one; why a lower-caste person should hire a high-caste Brahmin as cook;
why different wells have to be used by different people in the same villages;
why upper-caste people should be vegetarians while only lowly untouchables would touch a juicy beefsteak; why virtuous upper-caste widows
should throw themselves on their husband's funeral pyre, while women
from some low castes are hereditary prostitutes; why everything you do is
virtuous so long as you follow the rules, and so on. Clearly, the word,
"caste," is inadequate to convey all these complexities.

THE MINIMUM DEFINITION OF CASTE
This brings us to the second approach to the use of the term. Many scholars,
principally anthropologists and sociologists who are not Indianists, have
used "caste" to characterize a broad type of rigid social groups. Kroeber
(1948), Warner (1941), Alison W. Davis and the Gardners (1941), Myrdal
(1944) and many others have proposed what has been termed the "minimum
definition of caste." They advocated the use of the term to designate any
group exhibiting three features:
1. endogamy, i.e. compulsory marriage within the group;
2. ascriptive membership by birth and for life, and, hence, hereditary status;
3. ranking in a hierarchy in relation to other such groups
By this definition, caste is an analytical construct that applies to the Hindu
caste system but to a number of other systems as well. One of its most
frequent applications outside India has been to racial groups in countries
with a rigid racial hierarchy and clear definitions of racial boundaries, like
the United States and South Africa (A. W. Davis, B. B. Gardner and M. R.
Gardner, 1941; Myrdal, 1944; van den Berghe, 1965, 1978a). In these cases,
the term is often qualified and specified, and people speak of "racial caste."
This usage has been severely criticized by scholars who have argued that
race relations in the United States or South Africa bear only superficial
resemblance to caste relations in India (Cox, 1948).
The issue, however, is not how closely India resembles the United States
or other "caste" systems, but whether there is any analytical value in having
a term to designate an ideal-type of social group characterized by extreme
rigidity and permanence of membership, absence of intermarriage and invidious distinction vis-a-vis other such groups. Certainly, the objection to

160
applying "caste" to racial groups is of dubious validity since casta in the
original Iberian-American usage was applied to phenotypically distinct
groups. The casta system of classifying people, in the Spanish colonies in
particular, was never so rigid as to constitute a real caste system in the
modern analytical sense just defined. Interbreeding quickly blurred casta
distinctions and undermined any attempt to classify people according to a
racial taxonomy. Nevertheless, the original Spanish casta system was meant
to be a hierarchical classification of racial groups. It was even based on a
notion of limpieza de sangre (cleanliness of blood), not all that unlike Hindu
conceptions of ritual purity.
Interestingly, the concept of "race," as used in North America to designate
a phenotypically distinct group, was imported into Asia by some scholars
who applied it to a situation best described in terms of caste. The eta or
burakumin of Japan have been described by De Vos and Wagatsuma (1966)
as an "invisible race." Thus the terminological confusion has come full
circle. Some phenotypically distinct racial groups have been called "castes"
by analogy with the Hindu system. Conversely, some physically undistinguishable caste groups have been called "races" by analogy with North
American society.
Where does all this semantic imbroglio lead us? I personally think that
it is useful to have a special analytical term applicable to a wide range of
societies to designate that particular combination of class and ethnicity by
a special term, "Race" will not do for that purpose, since only some of these
systems are based on phenotypical distinctions. Furthermore, not all societies that do make phenotypical distinctions have the degree of rigidity and
racial endogamy that one associates with caste. Examples of such race-conscious but relative flexible social systems are Brazil, most Caribbean islands,
Hawaii and others (Lind, 1955; Lowenthal, 1972; van den Berghe, 1978a).
"Race" has utility as an analytical concept to designate phenotypically distinguished groups but not as a synonym for "caste." "Race" can be a special
case of caste but also a special case of more flexible social orders.
CASTE AND STIGMA
Here, I shall use "caste" to refer to those rigid social orders in which people
are assigned by birth and for life to compulsorily endogamous groups that
are, furthermore, stigmatized. We are, therefore, adding the additional element of stigma to the minimum definition of caste. "Hierarchy" is too weak
a term to describe this element of caste. To be sure, castes are in a hierarchy,
but what makes caste peculiarly invidious and demeaning is that the lower
group or groups in the system are not simply regarded as socially inferior.
They are also viewed as morally debased, ritually impure, genetically inferior (or whatever the rationale for their invidious treatment) by accident
of birth—and for reasons quite unrelated to individual merit, behavior or
actions.
As the stigma is believed to be immutable, there is nothing which the
stigmatized individual can do to escape it, except "cheat" (that is, avoid

161
detection through deceit, e.g. by "passing" or by changing a caste name) or
work for the destruction of the status quo. Hinduism provides, of course,
a third supernatural "solution" through the notion of reincarnation. "Good"
behavior in one's present existence, defined as "knowing one's place" in
the caste order and acting accordingly, ensures caste promotion upon rebirth
in the next life, until achievement of perfection brings Nirvana, the end of
the cycle of rebirths, the loss of separate identity and the fusion of atman
(soul) into the universal godhead. However, we are concerned with ideological superstructures here only insofar as they affect behavior and thus
regard Hindu theology as a means of perpetuating caste, not as a way of
escaping its consequences.
Caste, in short, means stigma for those at the bottom. It means ascriptive
group membership but to a group that everyone despises. It means hierarchy,
but a particularly demeaning type of hierarchy, a hierarchy supposedly
based on immutable inferiority. It means endogamy but not the usual kind
of preferential endogamy. The endogamy of caste is not one of choice; it is
imposed by the contempt of others. You must marry "your own kind"
because nobody else will have you.
Of course, stigmatization is not limited to caste (Goffman, 1963). A stigma
can be individual, nonhereditary and acquired. The criminal, for example,
is stigmatized because of his own behavior, and therefore his stigma is
justified and merited according to that society's moral code. Stigma only
becomes caste when it attaches to entire groups, when it is transmitted
hereditarily and when it is totally divorced of any notion of individual
responsibility. (Again, the Hindu notion of responsibility for one's action
in previous reincarnations does not count; it is merely an ethical dirty trick
invented by Brahmins.)
Since castes are endogamous, and since membership is acquired by birth
and for life, castes quickly became descent groups, and since we have seen
earlier that the basis of ethnicity is common descent we could simply define
caste as stigmatized ethnicity. This simple definition has problems, however. For one, it would immediately provoke a chorus of protest from the
Indianists who would, quite rightly, point out that caste (jati) in India is
not looked upon by most people as a stigma. A person's jati is a positive
reference group. It is the group within which one finds all of one's relatives
and many of one's closest friends, acquaintances and associates; it is the
all-encompassing matrix within which one lives one's life. Since the whole
society is organized in caste groups, one's caste membership is all-important.
Outside of it, there can be no social life. It is only modern ideology that has
emphasized the negative aspects of caste, the Indianist would say, but traditionally caste was also a positive thing, a solidary support group of kinsmen and associates that performed specialized functions in a vast, complex,
interdependent society. Most people had caste groups above and below
them, but those hierarchical relations were secondary to the positive relations of connubium, commensality, reciprocity and sociality within the
caste.
All of this is true, and constitutes one more reason why the term "caste"

162
is so inadequate to describe Indian reality. Better, caste, as just defined,
describes not the whole system of varna and jati in the traditional Hindu
system but only one small part of it, namely, untouchability. Indeed, by the
traditional Hindu definition of their position, harijans ("children of god,"
the pious euphemism coined by Mahatma Gandhi to refer to the "untouchables") are outside the Hindu "caste" system. They are so debased that they
have no place in the hierarchy of the four varna; their subgroups are so
much below every one else that they even have the "privilege" of being
exempted from virtually all moral injunctions of Hinduism. They are "free"
to eat beef, kill animals and remarry—in short, do all things abhorrent to
Hindus.

CASTE SOCIETIES VERSUS SOCIETIES WITH CASTE GROUPS
To resolve this apparent problem, I suggest that the most fundamental respect in which the Hindu "caste" system is so special is that the entire
societsociety is divided into rigid endogamous jati, not just some pariah groups. y is divided into rigid endogamous jati, not just some pariah groups.
This is so much the case that even the 17% or so of India's population who
practice supposedly noncaste or even anticaste religions, like Islam, Sikhism, Jainism, Zoroastrianism, Buddhism, Christianity and Judaism, are
themselves, for the most part, subdivided into caste or quasicaste groups.
Through a process known as "sanscritization" (Srivivas, 1969), Hinduism
reabsorbs, behaviorally if not theologically, the minority religious groups,
and high-caste practices filter down the Hindu caste hierarchy.
Only one other society has attempted to construct an equally all-encompassing caste system—South Africa. Far more common are the societies in
which some groups, usually minorities, are treated as hereditary, endogamous pariahs, but where the rest of the population is not casted. In short,
there have been very few castethere have been very few caste societiesthere have been very few castethere have been very few caste societies, but there have been a sizeable societies, but there have been a sizeable , but there have been a sizeable societies, but there have been a sizeable
number of societies with caste groups. In the former category, I would
unequivocally place only India and South Africa; while in the latter are
Japan (with the burakumin), the United States (with Afro-Americans) and
a number of traditional West African societies, where blacksmiths, storytellers and, in the case of the Ibo, devotees of a special cult are endogamous
pariah castes (Tuden and Plotnicov, 1970), Clearly, then, when one compares, say, the whole of Indian society with the entire United States, one
is struck much more by the differences than by the similarities. However,
if one restricts the comparison to the pariah groups of, say, the United
States, Japan and India, the number of similarities increases dramatically
(De Vos and Wagatsuma, 1966).
Let us return to our tentative short definition of caste as stigmatized
ethnicity. There is more than just stigmatization that makes caste a very
special case of ethnicity. First, caste is, at least in part, externally imposed
on the bottom groups by the group or groups at the top; the top groups police
and enforce the group boundaries. This does not preclude feelings of solidarity in the bottom groups, but that solidarity is often the solidarity of

163
degradation. Pariahs stick together only because they do not have the option
of joining other groups. In fact, stigmatization often has the effect of making
the pariahs internalize feelings of their own inferiority. The solidarity of
pariahs is often fairly low, precisely because it grows not out of internally
generated feelings of ethnocentric pride, but out of externally imposed denigration. Even when pariah groups develop "ethnic pride" movements, the
ideology of these movements is typically laden with ambivalence and is
reactive to the dominant group's ideology of stigmatization. The solidarity
of pariah groups is typically the negative solidarity born out of desperation.
It makes a profound difference whether one belongs to a group by choice,
or whether one is forced to. This makes a critical difference both in terms
of the collective definition of the group and in terms of individual identity
and self-evaluation. Pariah caste situations typically foster assimilation ideology in the bottom groups, not ethnic pride.
Second, the basis of caste differentiation is structural, not cultural as is
usually the case in "ordinary" ethnicity. Pariah castes typically share two
characteristics: they perform despised but essential roles in the division of
labor, and they share the same general culture, language and values with
the rest of the population. Pariah groups, unlike other ethnies, are not set
apart because of a past history of autonomous existence symbolized by a
separate language, culture and, often, territory. They are set off because they
have been ascribed an inferior role in the division of labor. Precisely because
they lack a history of autonomy, of separate territory and of a distinct cultural
identity, pariah castes typically share the same basic culture, religion and
language with the unstigmatized groups. Furthermore, since they perform
specialized roles in an interdependent economic system, pariah castes lack
even the option of establishing a separate, autonomous, self-sufficient ethnic
entity. Nationalism is not a realistic possibility to them.
C A S T E , C L A S S , SLAVERY AND ETHNICITY
Pariah castes have the worst of all possible worlds. Caste status shares with
class class the feature of spclass the feature of specialization in the division of labor but without the ecialization in the division of labohialization in the division of labor but without the ecialization in the division of labor but without the
option of changing jobs according to supply and demand in the labor market.
Caste status shares with slavery the stigma of low status, the political disability of powerlessness, the drudgery of hard work and the burden of economic exploitation, but without the possibility of individual escape from
that low status through flight or emancipation. Caste status shares with
ethethnicity the feature of common descent, but it lacks the realistic option of nicity the feature of common descent, but it lacks the ethethnicity the feature of common descent, but it lacks the realistic option of nicity the feature of common descent, but it lacks the realistic option of realistic option of
nationalism because it lacks a positive ethnic identity, a territorial basis,
distinctive cultural traditions and an autonomous basis of subsistence.
Short of suicide, exile or, sometimes, surreptitious "passing," pariah
castes members can only hope for the demise of the system that keeps them
apart, that is, for the disappearance of the stigma and, therefore, of their
group identity. Of all the ethnic groups, castes are the only ones which, if
given an opportunity, would commit "auto-ethnocide," that is, which would

164
gladly shed their separate identity and join the main body of the society
whose culture they share. If they fail to do so, it is not because they do not
want it, but because the persistence of the stigma prevents them from doing
so. Notwithstanding fashionable ideologies to the contrary, this is equally
true of harijans in India, of burakumin in Japan or of Afro-Americans in
the United States.

THE CASTE SITUATION: AN IDEAL TYPE
Let us retrace our somewhat circuitous and laborious steps in the attempt
to arrive at a concept of caste useable for purpose of comparative analysis.
We started out with India, not because India, in its complex entirety, is
typical of anything beside itself, but because that is where most discussions
of caste start—implicity or explicity. We, then, examined the other tradition
that developed around the concept of caste, namely, the attempt by sociologists and anthropologists to construct a "minimum definition" of caste
applicable to a number of societies besides India. Finally, we refined the
analysis to arrive at an ideal type of caste, the point at which we are now.
A caste situation may be said to exist to the extent that the following
conditions are found:
1. presence of one or more hereditary descent groups with membership
ascribed at birth and for life;
2. imposition of prescriptive endogamy on these groups;
3. attribution of an immutable collective stigma to some of these groups,
irrespective of individual behavior of their members;
4. ascription of specialized functions in the division of labor to these groups;
5. economic interdependence of these groups on a common society;
6. absence of large-scale territorial separation between these groups, but
numerous attempts to enforce both spatial and social barriers to various
forms of intergroup interaction between them;
7. relative cultural (including linguistic and religious) homogeneity between the groups, at either the societal or the subsocietal level.
To the extent that all or nearly all members of a society belong to caste
groups, we can speak of a caste society. Where only a minority of pariahs
belong to caste groups, we shall speak of a society with caste groups. Thus,
India and South Africa are caste societies, whereas Japan and the United
States are societies with caste groups.

CASTE IN INDUSTRIAL SOCIETIES
It has frequently been asserted that caste is a social formation incompatible
with an industrial mode of production. Caste produces rigidity in an economy that requires a mobile labor force capable of changing occupations and
acquiring new skills. If, as functionalists like Kingsley Davis (1942) sug-

165
gested, caste is a way of ensuring that jobs (passed on hereditarily) will be
done tolerably well, it is also a recipe for conservatism. A rapidly changing
industrial economy presumably requires something more adaptable than
hereditary occupations.
Yet, of the four larger contemporary societies where features of caste are
still most prominent, two (the United States and Japan) are among the
world's most hyperindustrialized; one (South Africa) is the most highly
industrialized country in Africa, and the fourth (India) is undergoing a rapid
process of industrialization. The counterargument is that all four of these
societies show signs of moving away from caste organization, in conformity
with the functionalist prediction. To this, in turn, it can be said that two
of these societies (South Africa and the United States) developed many
features of their racial caste system in the late 19th century as they were
entering their first phase of rapid industrialization (Myrdal, 1944; van den
Berghe, 1965; Woodward, 1955). Furthermore, both of these countries were
tardy, reluctant and only moderately successful in dismantling their caste
systems. In the United States, the process only started in earnest in the
1940s, and in South Africa it has barely begun and then only with the
greatest reluctance on the part of the whites—with all deliberate slowness.
As for Japan and India, legal abolition of caste disabilities seems to have
had only a slow and marginal effect on behavior (Srinivas, 1969; De Vos
and Wagatsuma, 1966).
On balance, then, the functionalist argument that caste is incompatible
with an industrial economy seems partly valid but overstated. On the one
hand, it underrates the nonrational aspects of human behavior, especially
when some form of ethnic or "racial" sentiment is involved. On the other
hand, it underplays the adaptive capabilities of humans who do not stop
at creating economically cumbersome, costly and complex adjustments if
they feel threatened. To anticipate our answer, the ultimate measure of

human success is not production but reproduction. Economic productivity
and profit are means to reproductive ends, not ends in themselves. Therefore, a dominant group, like South African whites, can be expected to sacrifice a great deal of economic efficiency if it perceives that alternative
policies threaten its survival. The ultimate justification given for apartheid
in South Africa is the Afrikaners' right to survival as a separate ethny.
Of the four countries under consideration, India and Japan developed
their caste institutions over many centuries of their existence as complex
agrarian societies. The limited success that both have experienced in the
20th century in eliminating the disabilities of harijans and burakumin,
respectively, can be ascribed to social inertia. Old prejudices and habits die
hard, it is said. Actually, this is hardly an explanation, because humans are
capable of changing their behavior very quickly when it is in their interest
to do so. Japan supposedly emancipated the burakumin in 1871, and yet,
to this date, private detective agencies make a living investigating the family
backgrounds of prospective spouses and employees for possible burakumin
ancestry (Hayashida, 1976). Four or five generations would seem a long

166
enough time to change attitudes, especially when we know of numerous
instances where one generation is quite enough (e.g. in sexual mores).
However, let us grant that the traditional caste systems of India and Japan
are less problematic than those of the United States and South Africa, because they were developed in the kind of society where one would expect
them to arise—namely, in complex agrarian societies. Let us, therefore, turn
to South Africa and the United States.

SOUTH AFRICA
South Africa is a country of such extraordinary complexity that we can only
attempt the barest summary description of the long sequel of historical
events that led to its present form. Fortunately many books cover the subject
adequately (Adam, 1971; De Kiewiet, 1941; Marquard, 1962; Sheila Patterson, 1953, 1957; Walker, 1957). The "race problem" of South Africa is, of
course, predominantly a creation of its European settlers and should be
called the "white problem." It began with Dutch settlement at the Cape in
1652 and quickly led to the growth of a little slave colony in and around
Capetown. Until the abolition of slavery by the British (who in 1806 conquered the Cape from the Dutch) in 1834, rural districts around Capetown
were occupied by small slave farms producing wine, fruits, vegetables, cereals and other fresh produce, mostly to resupply the sailing ships on their
way between Europe and Asia. During these two centuries, the interbreeding
of white settlers with slaves from Madagascar, Mozambique and the Dutch
East Indies, and with aboriginal "Hottenhots" (Khoikhoi), led to a distinct
group of people known today as the "Coloureds" (or, according to more
recent, fashionable terminology, "browns").
These Coloureds are a close homolog, incidentally, to Afro-Americans in
the United States, in that they are principally immigrants of mixed ancestry
with a history of slavery, but are linguistically, culturally and religiously
almost completely Europeanized. Except for a small minority of Muslim
"Cape Malays," South African Coloureds are, but for skin pigmentation,
poverty and stigmatization, virtually undistinguishable from South African
"whites." Indeed, a good many of the latter are Coloureds who have
"passed" in previous generations. In South Africa, as in the United States,
there are those who argue that the Coloureds (and American blacks) have
a culture distinctly their own, but empirical evidence for that assertion is
equally scanty in both cases. The case for a separate cultural identity of
these two groups rests almost entirely on a combination of regional and
class differences, plus a history of racial discrimination. The outstanding
difference between South African whites and Coloureds is not culture but
the caste line that separates them.
Starting in the 18th century, but at a rapidly accelerating pace after the
1830s, Dutch settlers (first called "Boers," the Dutch word for "farmer," and
later "Afrikaners," the Dutch word for "Africans") began to migrate into the
interior of Southern Africa. They first came into violent contact with "Hot-

167
tentots" (Xhoi-Xhoi) and "Bushmen" (San), and later with the various southeastern Bantu nations (the Sotho, Xhosa, Ndebele, Zulu, Venda and others).
The descendants of these Bantu nations are now known as "Africans" or
"blacks" (not to be confused with the "Afrikaners" who are whites of Dutch
descent).
The saga of the Boer expansion into the South African interior forms the
central episode of the historical myth of white (and especially Afrikaner)
South Africa and parallels in many ways the saga of the western frontier in
the United States. The Boers had to fight on two fronts, however: against
the black nations which were finally subjugated in the 1870s but which
were too numerous and too well-organized to be wiped out, and against the
British who repeatedly attempted to contain Boer expansionism.
The Boers established a series of more or less ephemeral whites-only
republics in the Orange Free State and the Transvaal, but the discovery of
diamonds in Kimberley in 1867 and then of gold near Johannesburg in 1886
spelled their doom. The Boer Republics became attractive targets for British
imperialism, and after an abortive attempt in 1880, Britain finally defeated
them in the 1899-1902 Anglo-Boer War.
The fourth major "racial" group in the South African kaleidoscope (besides the whites, the Coloureds and the Africans) are the Asians. They are
overwhelmingly East Indians who first came in 1860 to work as "coolies"
on the sugar plantations of coastal Natal, a British colony. Later, these indentured laborers were joined by Indian merchants, and South African Indians came to acquire many of the characteristics of a middleman minority.
In 1910, in the aftermath of the peace negotiations after the Anglo-Boer
War, the Union of South Africa was established by joining the British Colonies of the Cape and Natal with the former Boer Republics of the Transvaal
and the Orange Free State. The Union of South Africa was to be a "selfgoverning" state (later called "dominion" within the British Commonwealth
of Nations). The term "self-governing" appears in quotation marks, however,
because, except to a limited extent in the Cape Province, only the whites
had the right to vote and to govern themselves. South Africa became in
effect a white-ruled state with an internal colonial empire of "native reserves" (Marquard, 1957). After about 40 years of coalition governments in
which English and Afrikaner whites shared the spoils of ruling the nonwhites, the Afrikaner Nationalist Party won the 1948 elections, and immediately proceeded to implement its program of apartheid or "separate
development."
So much for a bare outline of South African history. At present, there are
25 million South Africans, of whom 17% are whites (roughly 10% Afrikaner,
7% English); 10% Coloureds; 3% Asians, and 70% Africans. Each of these
"racial" groups is subdivided by language and religion, so that there are in
fact many more ethnies than racial groups. The four racial groups, however,
are loosely analogous to the four varna of the Hindu system, each subdivided
into smaller ethnic communities, loosely analogous to jati, although much
more flexible. To complicate matters further, South African Indians have

168
imported a miniature version of the Hindu caste system that continues to
operate (albeit in greatly simplified form and affecting only marriage to any
significant degree) within their own group and subgroups. In fact, the barely
one million South Africans of Indian origin are divided among three main
religious groups (Hindus, Muslims and Christians), five language groups
(Hindi, Urdu, Gujarati, Tamil and Telugu) and a multiplicity of caste groups.
There is much discussion in the South African literature on the extent to
which the Nationalist program of apartheid was something new, or merely
an attempt to consolidate an apparatus of white domination and exploitation
that had been in place since the end of the 19th century. Certainly, all the
main features of the system had long existed. The "native reserve" system
was instituted in the 1840s, restricting African rural land occupancy to 13%
of the total area of the country (for 70% of the population). The infamous
"migratory labor system" (whereby male workers are virtually imprisoned
in military-style barracks for the duration of a labor contract at the end of
which they return home to their native reserves) was the cheap solution to
the exploitation of the diamond and gold mines and was put in operation
late in the 19th century.
"Pass laws" to control the movements of Africans by means of a "reference
book" to be produced on demand by the police date back to old 18th-century
vagrancy laws applied to Hottentots. The "Immorality Act," making sexual
relations between white and nonwhite a criminal offense, goes back to 1927.
Racial discrimination in wages and employment and the creation of a split
labor market, with supposely skilled white workers being paid up to 12
times as much as supposedly unskilled black workers, were also primarily
creations of the mining industry in the second half of the 19th century.
Numerous forms of racial segregation in urban housing, public transport,
places of worship and entertainment, public buildings, rest-rooms, hotels,
restaurants, hospitals and so on had all long been "customary" nearly everywhere in South Africa (though slightly less so in the Western Cape with its
old paternalistic, slavery tradition).
What, then, was new about apartheid? The answer is this: the attempt to
transform what had hereto been merely a highly exploitative, tyrannical and
racist brand of settler colonialism into a full-fledged racial caste system,
entrenched in law and frozen for all time. The apartheid program called for,
and soon tried to implement, the principle of maximum segregation between
airtight racial groups in every sphere, except the economic one where nonwhite labor was essential to the prosperity of the white-dominated economy.
The white group was made compuJsorily endogamous by the Prohibition
of Mixed Marriages Act (1949) and a beefed-up Immorality Act (amended
in 1950 and 1957). Surreptitious "passing" of Coloureds for white was
stopped by the Population Registration Act (1950), providing for the official
racial classification of all South Africans and the issuance of racial identity
cards.
What little residential mixing had taken place in a few urban areas was
undone by the Group Areas Act (1950, amended in 1952, 1955 and 1957)

169
which provided for the massive displacement of people (overwhelmingly
nonwhite) to create racially pure residential zones. The education of blacks
was taken away from missionaries suspected of liberalism and assigned to
the newly created Ministry of Bantu Education under the provisions of the
Bantu Education Act (1953). The three English-speaking universities that
had accepted a few nonwhite students (albeit in a segregated way) were
henceforth prevented from doing so by the Extension of University Education Act (1959), and completely segregated "universities" were created
for each of the nonwhite racial (and in some cases, ethnic) groups.
Politically, too, the incipient scrambling of the racial omelet was undone.
The Act of Union of 1910 gave Coloureds and blacks in the Cape Province
a limited franchise (qualified by property requirements) on the common
voters roll. A series of laws whittled down that representation, minimal as
it was. First, the franchise was extended to white women but not to nonwhite
women, thereby halving the nonwhite representation. Then, Africans were
removed from the common roll and allowed instead to elect three white
MP's (out of 153) to represent them. Then the Coloureds were taken off the
common roll and allowed to elect four white representatives. Finally, both
Coloureds and Africans lost even this vestigial representation through
whites in a common parliament and were given instead puppet institutions
of their own. The "native reserves" were revamped as "Bantustans," which,
one-by-one, are now given nominal political independence while remaining
under white control. The Coloureds and Indians supposedly rule themselves
through puppet councils of their own.
The Reservation of Separate Amenities Act (1953) not only legalized the
creation of racially segregated facilities in every walk of life, public and
private, but it also explicitly allowed inequality in the provision of these
facilities. This list of racially discriminatory acts is by no means exhaustive,
but it gives a fair idea of what apartheid is all about: the perpetuation of
white supremacy through the imposition of a racial caste system that would
freeze the status quo for all time. H. F. Verwoerd, a former Prime Minister,
could not have stated it better when, in 1964, he reasserted, "We want to
make South Africa White. . . . Keeping it White can only mean one thing,
namely White domination, not leadership, not guidance, but control, supremacy."
Naturally, such a program was not unopposed. Black underground organizations, such as the African National Congress and the Pan-African
Congress, have been active for many years, and there were two large-scale
but abortive rebellions in 1960 and 1976. Both of them were repressed in
bloodbaths. The South African Army and Police are armed and trained
primarily for counterinsurgency. The state has virtually unlimited powers
of arrest and search without warrant, detention without trial, censorship,
banning, exile and so on, under laws with names such as the Suppression
of Communism Act, the Public Safety Act, the Sabotage Act and the like.
When that fails, the police shoot down peaceful demonstrators in the streets
(including hundreds of boys, aged 12 to 18, in 1976) and torture and as-

170
sassinate political prisoners in jail (such as, in 1977, Steve Biko). South
Africa also has the dubious distinction of being the hanging capital of the
world: it legally executes between one-half and three-fourths of the total
death penalties for all noncommunist countries. Blacks who make up 70%
of the population account for 82% of the executions (Lever, 1978).
All of this is done, let it be emphasized, in a relatively highly urbanized
and industrialized country, with one of the highest per capita income and
literacy rates in Africa (Horwitz, 1967). Not only that, but the systematic
attempt to transform an exploitative but pragmatic form of settler colonialism into a dogmatically rigid caste society was done rather late in South
Africa's industrial development. It took place during the post-World War
II boom.
Why did white South Africans, and the government which represents
them, invest such a vast amount of energy and resources into creating such
a monstrous society that seems so widely at variance with what one expects
from a modern industrial economy, whether capitalist or socialist? Several
answers have been suggested. The orthodox Marxist answer is that apartheid
ideally suited the kind of dependent, peripheral capitalism represented by
South Africa, especially in the mining industry (Johnstone, 1976; Wolpe,
1970). As proof of their thesis, Marxists point to the spectacular rate of
postwar economic development. There is no question that the migratory
labor system was indeed highly suited to the extractive industry, and that
initially the main impetus for capitalist development came out of diamond
and gold mining. By World War II, however, secondary industry had far
outstripped both agriculture and mining in importance; each of the latter
contributes about one-tenth of the South African GNP compared to onefourth for manufacturing. In secondary industry, apartheid did impose artificial shortages of skilled labor and other uneconomic restraints that many
industrialists have done their best to circumvent. The Marxist thesis somewhat explains the genesis of some features of the system in the late 19th
century, but it is not a satisfactory explanation of post-World War II apartheid. All the same, it is true that white South Africans have been able to
have both their butter and their guns, and that apartheid served them well.
This is true, however, not because apartheid is the handmaiden of capitalism, but because it represents the interests of a settler minority.
Another thesis is that Nationalist apartheid policies represented the interests not of the capitalist class (which is predominantly English) but of
the white "aristocracy of labor"—the highly paid, skilled, white workers
who are protected from black competition by racial legislation. This creates
a split labor market that benefits mainly the privileged white working class,
predominantly Afrikaner. This is the class that elected the Nationalists to
power (Bonacich, 1979). The split labor market thesis of apartheid has, of
course, considerable merit. Many events in South African history point to
a conflict of economic interests between capitalists and white working
class—a conflict resolved at the expense of black workers. There was even
an abortive white labor revolt against the mining companies in 1922 over

171
the issue of displacement of whites by cheap black workers. The slogan of
the socialist strikers was "Workers of the world unite for a white South
Africa!" The fact remains, however, that the Nationalist Party is an ethnic
party of the Afrikaners, not a class party of the white working class. Voting
statistics show clearly the ethnic character of the party that invented and
implemented apartheid.
A third explanation is that the Afrikaner Nationalists, far from being racial
dogmatists bent on transforming South Africa into a rigid caste society, are
in fact a flexible, pragmatic oligarchy of politicians ready to compromise
not only with their Afrikaner electorate and with the English business interests but, if need be, win with the "moderate" leadership of the nonwhite
groups that it is ready to coopt, bribe and cajole into acquiescence (Adam,
1971; Adam and Giliomee, 1979). There are some recent developments that
lend some credibility to this view, and, of course, it would be ridiculous
to claim that the government has always been totally unbending to practical
considerations. Nevertheless, the South African government has, on numerous occasions, shown considerable alacrity in paying a considerable
economic price to implement various apartheid schemes that made no sense
except within the framework of apartheid ideology. The creation of segregated colleges for the various nonwhite groups is a case in point. The maintenance of a huge police and paramilitary apparatus to enforce the pass laws
is another.
What can we conclude? Despite its costs, apartheid served the interests
of the Afrikaners and, more broadly, those of the whites, quite well, at least
up to the present. In real terms, the standard of living of white South Africans
is among the highest in the world, especially if one takes into account the
low cost of services, housing and food. These are heavily subsidized by
artificially low nonwhite wages; whites also enjoy the shelter of high wages
and racial privileges that they could not sustain in the absence of a systematic system of racial discrimination. It is no mean achievement for a group
of 4.5 million people to sustain a level of collective affluence that, depending
on the criteria selected, is five to eight times higher than the 20 million
people who are black or brown. This kind of group disparity, sustained over
several centuries, does not happen "naturally" in a free-market economy.
It develops through concerted discrimination, and it can only be maintained
through continued discrimination.
Therefore, the question is not whether apartheid was most conducive to
the optimization of output under a capitalist mode of production. It obviously was not, though it also proved itself not to be as incompatible with
industrial capitalism as some would have predicted. Rather, the question
is whether apartheid was an optimal policy for the defense of the interests
of the group that advocated and implemented it.
The answer is by no means obvious. Perhaps in the short run it is positive
and in the long run negative. Time will tell, and there are signs that we shall
not have to wait much longer for an answer, for apartheid is rapidly coming
unstuck at the seams. But more of that later. Let us look at the Afrikaners

172
as a highly politically conscious ethny, and at the options they had as a
group, given their objective situation. English-speaking whites acquiesced
in and benefited from apartheid too, but they were less directly involved,
since it was the Afrikaners and their Nationalist Party who were the main
architects of apartheid.
If any group of people on earth qualify as an ethny, the Afrikaners do. All
analysts are in agreement here (Adam, 1971; Adam and Gilionee, 1979;
Moodie, 1975; Munger, 1967; Sheila Patterson, 1957). The Afrikaners regard
themselves not so much as white settlers, capitalists, a working class or
European colonials, but as a people with a sense of destiny forged through
three centuries of struggle against great odds, as a nation with a heroic
tradition and an origin myth (the Great Trek), as a vast descent group of
kinsmen who share the same blood and as the "white tribe of Africa." Like
countless other ethnies, they regard themselves as superior to their neighbors—vastly superior in their case because they think of themselves as being
racially, morally and culturally above the "pagan barbarians" around them.
(The Biblical "chosen people" theme from the Old Testament comes in as
a handy parallel here, notwithstanding considerable anti-Semitism among
Afrikaners.)
The ultimate defense of apartheid to which Afrikaners resort, after all the
ideological claptrap of "separate development" has been disposed of, is the
right of survival on African soil. That is, Afrikaners, like other people,
ultimately reduce the problem to stark fitness considerations. Here, there
are four main alternatives:
1. Emigration. But claiming no other home, where would they go?
2. Individual survival as equals in a color-blind, integrated society. This
solution is abhorrent because it implies loss of ethnic identity and, ultimately, the unspeakable taboo of "miscegenation." Integration is rejected because it is seen as a process of moral, cultural and racial
degradation.
3. Collective survival as a separate ethny but without the right to boss
others. This solution is probably more acceptable to many Afrikaners
than the first two, but its logic implies territorial partition and a much
reduced "whitestan," probably in the Western Cape Province. Even that
they would have to share with brown Afrikaners, thus facing a new color
problem, albeit on a reduced scale. So the third solution would be very
costly—only to be considered as a last resort if everything else fails.
4. The status quo, but systematically refined to its ultimate conclusion,
namely the transformation of a settler colonialism into a racial caste
society. In short, apartheid.
It is not difficult to understand why Afrikaners opted for the fourth course.
They realized it might be catastrophic in the end, but they firmly believed
that the alternatives would be far worst, far sooner. In 1948, when they
embarked on that course, hardly anyone would have predicted the collapse

173
of European colonialism in Africa within a decade. Even in 1960, when
prospects suddenly turned much gloomier things still looked far from desperate for South African whites. In fact, it would take another 20 years for
white control to be relinquished in all the territories to the north of South
Africa. Certainly, the intervening events elsewhere in Africa gave South
African whites little reason for a belated change of course. Zaire, Algeria
and, later, Mozambique, Angola and Zimbabwe, proved unhealthy places
to stay in for their excolonial whites. So what realistic option did the Afrikaners have, as a group, but to dig in so as to postpone the inevitable?
In so doing, the Afrikaners, and by extension English-speaking whites as
well, behave no differently from other groups in similar situations. Now,
the inevitable is at their doorstep. By defining themselves in racial and
ethnic terms, they have also defined the terms of the confrontation: five
million whites perched precariously at the tip of a continent inhabited by
400 million blacks, with no friends in sight. No matter what happens, South
African whites stand to lose heavily, perhaps their very lives, or at least
their place under the African sun they love so much. Even if allowed to
stay on equal terms, for most whites those equal terms will mean a drastic
reduction of their present standard of living, so drastic in fact that most
would probably find it intolerable and choose emigration instead.
The edifice of apartheid shows numerous cracks that herald its impending
crash. The "Bantustan" scheme with is sham independence to African ministates satisfies nobody and fails to solve the problem of a rapidly growing
urban African population. The Coloureds show increasing signs of militancy
and rejection of their pariah status. The puppet councils of the various
nonwhite groups have no legitimacy. Industrial apartheid is being increasingly breached as the demand for skilled labor forces employers to upgrade
nonwhite workers. The "black consciousness" movement is achieving an
unprecedented level of solidarity between Africans and Coloureds.
In response to mounting pressure and international embarrassment, the
government is belatedly jettisoning one aspect of "petty apartheid" after
another. Apartheid signs are gradually disappearing from buildings. Luxury
hotels and restaurants are opening up to nonwhites to accommodate diplomats and distinguished foreign visitors and to project a better image overseas. Interracial sports and cultural events are cautiously being introduced
in response to international boycotts and as an internal safety valve. All this
has to be done cautiously, because the government must avoid alienating
its all-white electorate. The government is now even daring to discuss abolishing the ultimate racial taboo, by repealing the Immorality Act and the
Prohibition of Mixed Marriages Act. All these measures are taken with the
hope that the racial caste system can be dismantled without affecting the
substance of white political power and economic exploitation. Perhaps the
government also hopes that it can thereby co-opt the growing African middle
class and appease the fury of the nonwhite masses by taking the racial sting
out of exploitation.
Some analysts view these recent changes as evidence of the South African

174
government's flexibility and ability to weather storms by trimming its sails.
It is clear that the attempt to perpetuate a racial caste system in South Africa
has failed. The likelihood of preserving a deracialized colonial system
through symbolic concessions is also extremely low. The system is so unequal and iniquitous that it is not amenable to concessions and compromise.
Past experience with decolonization elsewhere in Africa, especially in Zimbabwe (which was in almost every respect a miniature version of South
Africa), seems to indicate that the end of white domination is in sight. The
only question is whether it will take the form of a prolonged civil war, a
negotiated partition or a frantic white exodus. The odds favor, I think, a
long escalating war of attrition accompanied by a gradual economic winddown and a growing white emigration.
In retrospect, although apartheid failed in the end, it was a rational course
for the Afrikaners to take, given their collective aims, and it probably did
postpone the day of reckoning by about 30 years. The Afrikaners simply
tried to push to its ultimate conclusions the logic of settler colonialism.
They did so because they could not accept the alternative, universalistic
logic of a shared, integrated society along liberal lines. Having forged a
powerful ethnic identity through 300 years of historical vicissitudes, they
became prisoners of their narrow racial definition of ethnicity. In this, they
are far from unique. Without the pressures of a European colonial office to
restrain them, they had the courage of their narrow, bigoted convictions,
and they tried to apply consistently and to the bitter end the best possible
program for the maximization of their fitness. And they had the saving grace
of not being hypocritical about it.
THE UNITED STATES
Clearly, the United States never was a caste society by our definition. However, for the better part of a century, it was a society with one relatively
large caste group. After the abolition of slavery, Afro-Americans became a
pariah caste and, in some respects, remain so to the present. After the
Reconstruction period, especially between 1890 and World War I, the southern states developed through their Jim Crow laws a genuine regional caste
system (Woodward, 1955). In the rest of the country, the caste system was
less developed, but, even there, important features of it existed in many
states, for example, antimiscegenation laws. Indeed, free blacks began to be
treated as pariahs in the northern states long before the abolition of slavery
(Litwack, 1961).
One thing is clear about the United States: the position of blacks is quite
unlike that of any other minority group. While they are, on the average,
about twice as poor as whites and while racial discrimination has a strong
negative impact on their standard of living, the predicament in which blacks
find themselves is not in the first instance economic. There are more poor
whites than poor blacks, and other minority groups such as American Indians and Chicanos are, on the average, much poorer than blacks. Yet, other

175
poor groups, unlike blacks, are not pariahs. Conversely, even the black
middle class is not spared all the consequences of racial stigmatization,
although there is now a substantial trend toward destigmatization (William
J. Wilson, 1978).
Amerindians
Let us briefly compare blacks to other ethnic and racial groups in the United
States. At the bottom of the economic totem pole are Amerindians. By a
rather wide margin, they have the lowest family and per-capita income of
any group, the lowest level of educational achievement, the highest infant
mortality rates, the lowest life expectancy and so on. By almost any objective
criterion, they are the worst off. Yet, they are not a pariah group like the
blacks, and they lack nearly all the characteristics of a caste. For example,
far from being endogamous, they have long had a high rate of intermarriage
with practically every other ethnic and racial group around them: Anglos,
Hispanics, blacks and Asians.
Rather, Native Americans are classical conquered groups. They have retained the vestiges of territoriality in their reservations, and they are officially recognized as special groups with special treaty rights. Though many
are highly acculturated to the dominant Anglo-American culture, some
groups, especially in the southwest, still speak indigenous languages and
have retained their own separate cultures. Individual Indians, however, who
want to leave the reservation and exercise their rights as American citizens,
can do so with little resistance. Many of them can easily " p a s s " for white
or assume some other ethnic identity such as Hispanic. Typically, Indians
who leave the reservation do not form Indian ghettoes in towns but become
dispersed individuals who quickly sink into the "hobo" lumpenproletariat,
intermarry or melt into the mainstream.
The Indians' relationship to the Federal government clearly follows the
model of internal colonialism. The Bureau of Indian Affairs is a colonial
government within a government, with special jurisdiction over groups legally defined as having different rights (recognized in international treaties),
which imply separate nationhood and extraterritoriality vis-a-vis the rest
of the country and the population. The situation of Indians, in short, has
all the hallmarks of a classical colonial situation. Amerindians have at least
the residues of territoriality, of separate nationhood and of distinctive languages and cultures. They are conquered micronations, engulfed in a huge
neo-European representative government that treats them as a microcolonial
empire.
European Immigrants
The situation of European immigrant groups in the United States is characteristic of what happens to voluntary immigrants who come to settle in
an established society and who come neither as a middleman minority nor

176
as a conquering group. I shall analyze that situation in detail in Chapter 10.
Here, let us simply characterize it as the classical "melting pot," in which
the immigrant group typically enters the labor market in the urban proletariat but gradually, over two or three generations, becomes almost undistinguishable in language, culture and class distribution with the "mainstream"
population (which can be either native or, more frequently, itself the product
of earlier waves of immigration). Clearly, those groups are not stigmatized,
though they often encountered considerable prejudice and discrimination
initially. Their "foreignness" was often resented, but they were always offered the option of becoming "Americanized." Indeed, they often had to,
as the price of acceptance.

Non-European Immigrants
Immigrants from Asia and Latin America often found themselves, at least
initially, in a position intermediate between the European immigrants and
the blacks. They shared their "foreignness" with European immigrants, but
they also suffered, for the most part, from the stigma of not being "white."
Therefore, their assimilation into the mainstream was, on the whole, much
slower and more difficult. Hispanics are in a somewhat anomalous twilight
zone between race and ethnicity. A minority among the immigrants from
Latin America can pass for white, and their position is little different from
that of European immigrants. The "success story" of the Castro refugees in
Florida is a case in point: they were mostly light-skinned members of the
Cuban bourgeoisie who came with skills and capital and were fairly readily
accepted.
Some Latin American and Caribbean immigrants are phenotypically black
(including a number of Puerto Ricans, who, technically, are not immigrants)
and therefore share much of the stigma of Afro-Americans. Among them,
a number of West Indians (e.g. Haitians and Jamaicans) have done relatively
well, because they often came with skills and because they had not been
traumatized by the American caste experience. A number of West Indians,
for example, have become prominent professionals, artists and intellectuals,
but they have been forced to gravitate to the black community. Most immigrants from Mexico and Central America are, of course, Indian-looking
and therefore also racially stigmatized, though not nearly as much as blacks.
Hispanics, through large regional concentrations in southern California
and the southwest where they constitute large and increasingly vocal and
politically organized minorities, have a great chance of perpetuating their
cultural pluralism for several generations and perhaps indefinitely. In New
Mexico, the Spanish language has acquired official status, and there is some
possibility of Hispanics constituting a genuine nation, separate from the
Anglo mainstream. Certainly, of all the sizeable minorities in the United
States, they are the only group for which such a potential is realistic.
The Asian minorities are too culturally diverse, numerically small and
geographically dispersed to have any realistic alternative to assimilation.

177
Initially, between the late 19th century and World War II, they were subjected to virulent racial prejudice, leading, in the case of the Japanese, to
internment in concentration camps. Indeed, up to World War II, their status
in the western states, especially California, was barely better than that of
the blacks. However, their position drastically improved after World War
II. Japanese-Americans were especially successful in terms of education and
entry into the middle class, but the Chinese, too, began to disperse from
their traditional ghettoes and be increasingly accepted. Successive waves
of Korean, Philippino and, most recently, Indochinese immigrants all show
signs of fairly rapid acculturation to, and fairly easy acceptance by the white
population. Rates of intermarriage are quite high for most Asian groups, not
only between Asian groups, but also with whites.

Afro-Americans
No other group in the United States approaches blacks in degree of stigmatization. Blacks are stigmatized because of their "race," not primarily
because they are poor and lower class. At least one-third of the black population belongs in the middle class by educational and socioeconomic criteria, and other groups (Chicanos, Amerindians) are on the average much
poorer. Blacks are not ostracized because they are foreign. Indeed, most are
of older American stock than most whites. It has become fashionable in the
1970s to claim that blacks have a distinctive culture and language of their
own, but that claim is largely ideological and romantic. By almost any
objective standards, American blacks share the language, religion, values
and so on of their white counterparts. To use a colorful Caribbean phrase,
they are culturally "Afro-Saxons."
The romantic search for survivals of African culture is elusive (Herskovits,
1958). When one controls for region of origin, social class and rural—urban
residence, most of the alleged cultural differences between whites and blacks
"wash out." Ghetto lumpenproletarian blacks in Chicago, Detroit or New
York may seem to have a distinct subculture of their own compared collectively to their white neighbors, but the black Mississippi share-cropper
is not very different, except for skin pigmentation, from his white counterparts, nor is the San Francisco black physician from his white colleague.
The case for "black culture" rests thus largely on the northern ghetto lumpenproletariat, a class which has no direct white counterpart. Even in that
group, however, much of the distinctiveness is traceable to their southern,
rural origins. The remaining differences are not African survivals but adaptations to stigma.
In short, notwithstanding much recent ideology to the contrary, AfroAmericans are as Anglo as anyone is in America. Blacks are rejected not
because they are poor or foreign but because they are black. There is considerable evidence that the stigma has been diminishing over the last 30
years (W. J. Wilson, 1978), but a great deal of it still remains as shown by
the continued high rate of endogamy. Interracial marriages are still taboo,

178
and there is even considerable resistance to the interracial adoption of
blacks. The caste system is slowly being eroded, but, W. J. Wilson's (1978)
conclusions are still premature and overly optimistic.
How did the American social caste system develop? Broadly, as a substitute for slavery. It was the supreme irony of American democratic ideology
that, in order to reconcile slavery with democracy, black slaves had to be
defined as less than fully human. How else could slaveowners like Washington, Jefferson, Madison, Monroe and many other founding fathers loudly
proclaim that "all men are created equal" except by implicitly excluding
their human livestock from their definition of humanity? Slavery, however,
as shown in Chapter 6, was not a caste system. Master and slaves lived in
intimate proximity and interdependence; they interbred and formed other
close affective bonds. Even though their relations remained highly unequal,
neither whites nor blacks formed an autonomous, inbred community. Slaves
were largely prevented from forming autonomous black communities. The
social life of blacks under slavery was a truncated one (Genovese, 1974).
The real community of slavery, perverse though it was, was the plantation,
an interracial community, at once hierarchical and intimate, socially distant
but spatially and biologically close.
Racism was developed to rationalize the subjection of blacks. The black
was "all right" so long as he stayed "in his place," that is, so long as he
remained a slave. As a slave, he was a perpetual minor, a dependent, a
grown-up child without any claims to autonomy or political rights. Had it
not been for the political tradition of liberalism, slavery would not have
needed such an elaborate racist ideology. Many slavery systems, as we have
seen, have been nonracist, and certainly in Latin America the more openly
autocratic colonial regimes of Spain and Portugal were, on the whole, much
less racist. Liberalism and racism were complementary, not contradictary,
features of the American political credo and practice.
If blacks were inferior and, therefore, born to be slaves, if indeed slavery
was good for them as well as for whites, then what was to be made of them
if they were freed? The logic of the democratic ideology dictated enfranchisement, assimilation and equality. But, given the racist climate, this was
unthinkable, even to people like Jefferson and Lincoln who were in principle
against slavery. The thought of free blacks living side-by-side with whites
on terms of equality was utterly abhorrent to them. For example, the 1821
quotation from Jefferson to the effect that "nothing is more certainly written
in the book of fate, than that these people [i.e. blacks) are to be free" is
frequently cited. But after a semicolon, he continues, "Nor is it less certain,
that the two races, equally free, cannot live in the same government. Nature,
habit, opinions have drawn indelible lines of distinction between them
(Foley, 1900, p. 817)."
One solution, strongly advocated by many 18th century abolitionists, including Jefferson, was deportation to West Africa. The American Colonization Society, strongly supported by Jefferson, was founded for the purpose
of settling free blacks in Africa, and later the American quasicolony of
Liberia in West Africa was established to implement that purpose. Even

179
long after it became clear that deportation on a large scale was not feasible,
the idea of racial equality with free blacks was still abhorrent. Lincoln, the
"Great Emancipator," for example, declared in 1858:
I will say then that I am not, nor ever have been in favor of bringing about in any
way the social and political equality of the white and black races,—that I am not
nor ever have been in favor of making voters or jurors of negroes, nor of qualifying
them to hold office, nor to intermarry with white people; and I will say in addition
to this that there is a physical difference between the white and black races which
I believe will forever forbid the two races living together on terms of social and
political equality. And inasmuch as they cannot so live, while they do remain
together there must be the position of superior and inferior, and I as much as any
other man am in favor of having the superior position assigned to the white race
(Angle, 1958. p. 117).
The other "solution" to the "black problem" was caste. Since blacks had
to stay but could no longer be held as slaves, then they must be segregated
in pariah communities, confined to menial jobs, kept in perpetual inferiority
and political subjection and prevented from interbreeding with white
women. (Racial mixture in the other direction was never regarded as problematic, again for reasons that sociobiology makes quite evident.) The southern states bear the brunt of the blame for creating the legal apperatus of Jim
Crow, which was simply the formal expression of the caste system. Woodward (1955) documents in detail these developments after the Reconstruction period, especially after 1890. However, the outcasting of blacks was not
by any means exclusively a phenomenon of the south.
Outcasting measures, such as segregation, disenfranchisement, prohibition of interracial marriages and denial of the right to bear arms were applied
to free blacks in both the north and the south (Litwak, 1961). The fact that
this happened to free blacks long before the abolition of slavery shows how
much pariah status was clearly thought of as the only suitable alternative
to slavery for blacks. The south is blamed for Jim Crow because the sudden
emancipation of large numbers of blacks in the south made for the sudden
elaboration of a vast legal and extralegal apparatus for keeping blacks in
their pariah status. But free blacks, long before 1865, were already outcasted,
about equally so in the north and the south, excepting perhaps New England
where blacks were so few as not to present a "problem." As late as the
1940s, 30 states in the United States had antimiscegenation statutes on their
books, and the U.S. Supreme Court did not declare those statutes unconstitutional until 1967 (Simpson and Yinger, 1972, pp. 503-504).
The heyday of the American caste system was the half-century between
1890 and 1940. To the social and legal practices of racial discrimination
corresponded an elaborate pseudoscientific racism and Social Darwinism
(Hofstadter, 1959). By the 1920s and increasingly in the 1930s, anantiracist
reaction began to grow in the social sciences, under the influence of scholars
like R. E. Park in sociology, Gordon Allport in psychology and Franz Boas
and Ruth Benedict in anthropology, but its full impact did not make itself
felt on policy and general attitudes until World War II.

180
The war itself provided numerous employment opportunities for blacks
(and women) in industry and accelerated the migration of blacks from the
south to the north and west and from rural areas to cities. The Federal
government took the belated step of desegregating its Armed Services (which
was still a Jim Crow force during most of World War II) and took the lead
in prohibiting racial discrimination in firms under government contracts.
The Brown vs the Board of Education decision of the Supreme Court in
1954 reversed the "separate but equal" doctrine which, since the Plessy vs
Ferguson decision of 1896 had given legal sanction to racial segregation.
With the growth of the Civil Rights movement in the 1950s and 1960s, the
American caste system was under growing assault by a coalition of blacks
and white liberals, and the country seemed to be moving, however slowly
and reluctantly, toward a racially integrated society.
Then, around 1968, a curious reversal of integration took place. A section
of the black leadership grew impatient with the pace of progress, angered
by the unemployment, urban decay, educational decline, drug and crime
epidemic and other endemic problems of the black ghettoes, and irritated
by what it saw as the paternalism of its white liberal allies. It began to
develop an ideology of black pride and black nationalism that struck a
resonant chord on the nation's campuses and changed the entire climate of
race relations. The universalistic civil rights movement became a particularistic black movement, the ideological thrust of which was an attempt to
transform blackness from a stigma to a badge of pride and, thereby, to change
the position of Afro-Americans from that of a pariah racial group to that of
an ethnic group.
Logically, this new "militant" ideology called for racial separation and
self-determination, the rejection of white liberalism, the development of
racial pride and identity, the rejection of assimilation as an ideal, the creation of separate cultural institutions to sustain that "nationalist" movement
and a political strategy of organizing blacks qua blacks. Afro-Americans
were to unite and form a pressure group, seeking to gain racial representation
at all levels of public life and to pressure for governmental intervention on
behalf of blacks in both the public and the private sectors (especially in
education, housing and employment).
The response was electrifying. Soon the whole country went on an ethnic
rampage as one group after another organized (in part in self-defense against
blacks) along ethnic or pseudo-ethnic lines. First the Chicanos and Amerindians, then the "white ethnics," ultimately even such nonethnic groups
as feminists and "grey panthers" adopted the rhetoric, ideology and tactics
of black militants. Facing mounting pressures from all sides for ethnic recognition, the government—a conservative government under Nixon, let it
be noted—responded by re-institutionalizing racial and ethnic criteria for
employment, housing, admission to educational institutions, busing of children to and from schools, promotions in the Civil Service, etc. "Affirmative
action" was proclaimed as a concerted attempt to undertake special measures to overcome the accumulated effect of past discrimination, whether
individual or institutional. With affirmative action came racial quotas, dou-

181
ble standards and categorization of people by race or ethnicity rather than
merit. The pros and cons of these policies are still being hotly debated, and
now the political tide seems to be turning against them as their liabilities
and ineffectiveness are becoming increasingly apparent (Glazer, 1975; O.
Patterson, 1977).
The bulk of the evidence seems to suggest that, while "affirmative action"
has indeed provided some high-level jobs to substantial numbers of collegeeducated blacks as token representatives of "their" group, it has also had
a great many counterproductive consequences, not only to the society as a
whole, but even to blacks and members of other ethnic minorities. Among
other things, affirmative action has done the following:
1. It has heightened racial consciousness and thus partially reversed the
trend to deracialization of American society. In order to enforce school
busing, affirmative action in hiring, preferential admission of blacks to
universities and so on, it became increasingly necessary to classify people
by race and to reverse the previous trend toward the deletion of all racial
information on all application forms and official records. Affirmative
action, whatever its intent, gives the stamp of official approval on the
recognition of racial and ethnic differences and on the legitimacy of
treating people as members of groups rather than on the basis of individual merit. It, therefore, contains a profound internal contradiction
because it necessarily entrenches what it purports to eliminate: racial
distinctions. Affirmative action also legitimizes the dubious concept of
collective guilt for past actions, since the rationale for reverse discrimination is that one group is to be advantaged compared to another to
compensate for past discrimination.
2. Affirmative action has raised serious problems of equity and aroused a
considerable white backlash against what is seen as unjust racial discrimination against whites, or more specifically as anti-Semitism or antiCatholicism. Poor, educationally disadvantaged whites legitimately have
asked why they, too, should not be the beneficiaries of affirmative action
and they have begun to organize politically, often against blacks. So have
other "disadvantaged" groups such as Viet Nam war veterans, the old
and the physically handicapped. Among the nonwhite minority groups
themselves, bitter factionalism and hostility are fanned in the competitive process of fighting over the rather meager spoils of affirmative action.
In the end, nearly everybody has felt unjustly treated and has organized
against competing groups. Once more, affirmative action, far from reducing barriers to integration, has created new ones.
3. Affirmative action increases the class gulf between the black middle class
and the ghetto subproletariat. It clearly benefits some of the former, but
does little or nothing to alleviate the very serious and worsening problems of the latter (W. J. Wilson, 1978).
4. Affirmative action demeans the groups it is supposed to help since the
rationale for it implies inferiority. Its philosophy is clearly paternalist,
and it often creates a quasicolonial structure for blacks (in the form of

182
"offices of minority affairs," "black studies programs," racially labeled
scholarships, awards and positions, and the like). Many of these institutions, far from promoting integration, perpetuate the stigmatization of
blacks and extend to them a governmental machinery similar in form
and content to the Bureau of Indian Affairs or the Reconstruction Era's
Freedmen's Bureau.
5. The more blacks (and other minorities) are given preferential treatment,
the more questionable the qualifications of all blacks become. Affirmative action is therefore resented by many qualified, competent blacks as
not only an insult to them, but an impediment to their careers. Another
aspect of this problem is the perpetuation of white stereotypes of black
inferiority. To the extent that some blacks have indeed been promoted
above their level of competence to fill quotas and "guidelines" in a hurry,
this is often interpreted as evidence of black incompetence.
As an economist (Sowell, 1972) suggested, affirmative action has had the
effect in many highly skilled occupations, such as academic professions, of
promoting blacks several notches above comparably skilled whites. The
problem is compounded by the fact that blacks are often chosen and recruited by whites not on the basis of merit but according to political, ideological and behavioral attributes that will make them "good" tokens. Thus,
a person who is competent to be, say, a professor of French in a junior
college and who would stay there if he were white, finds himself at a large
state university because he is black. There, he is found wanting by the
standards of that institution and denied tenure after a few years, leading to
bitterness all around. Similarly, a professor who would do well at middling
state university may not be competitive at Harvard or Princeton, yet find
himself there simply because he is black. Affirmative action, by creating
artificial shortages in the labor market, also creates inequities in salary and
racial discrepancies in levels of competence. For example, black sociologists, though still grossly underrepresented in terms of numbers, make about
$4,000 more in average salary than their white counterparts (Lewis, Warner
and Gregorio, 1979). In the past, of course, the reverse was often true. In
many lower- and middle-level occupations, blacks were often better qualified and more educated than their white counterparts because of racial
discrimination in the other direction. It was not uncommon for black railway
porters and postal clerks, for example, to be college graduates.
The Future of Caste in the United States
Despite the temporary reversals caused by the policies of the 1970s, W. J.
Wilson's (1978) prognosis of a gradual disappearance of the stigma of race
in the United States seems likely to be realized. This will probably be
accompanied by an increasing class polarization within the black group.
Whereas the black middle class is experiencing declining racial prejudice,
increasing acceptance in the area of employment and a lowering of barriers,

183
there is little evidence that the lot of the black urban proletariat is improving.
In some respects, it seems to be deteriorating. For example, at the time of
publication of the controversial Moynihan Report (Moynihan, 1965) 26%
of black children were born illegitimate; in 1976, illegitimacy passed the
50% mark. In 1965, 7 1 % of black children lived with both of their parents;
by 1977, under 47% did so. In 1961, 14% of black children were on "welfare," compared to 38% in 1977 (van den Berghe, 1979a). Statistics on youth
unemployment and underemployment, on crime and on drug addition
among ghetto blacks also point to a deteriorating situation, although, at the
same time, there is increasing evidence that more and more blacks are getting
a college education, and that the socioeconomic conditions of those who
do are rapidly approaching those of their white counterparts (W. J. Wilson,
1978).
The overall picture, then, is one of movement from caste to class, despite
the adverse effects of affirmative action. The United States situation is, of
course, fundamentally different from that of South Africa. South African
whites, especially the Afrikaners, are a dominant but beleaguered minority
with an acute sense of ethnicity and race. They have built their entire way
of life on political domination and economic exploitation and, without the
artificial privileges of a racial caste system, they could not sustain themselves anywhere near the level of affluence to which they have become
accustomed. In short, they draw enormous benefits from the racial caste
system they erected. However, in the United States, the whites are an overwhelming majority, so much so that they cannot be meaningfully conceived
of as a ruling group at all. The label "white" in the United States does not
correspond to a well-defined ethnic or racial group with a high degree of
social organization or even self-consciousness, except regionally in the
south. The racial caste system is increasingly an anachronistic remnant of
a previous age, and the benefits of racism to the whites are becoming more
and more marginal. Most whites would probably now accept color-blind
policies based on merit and the total abolition of all forms of institutional
racial discrimination, although prejudicial attitudes linger on. They would

do so because they realize that they have little or nothing to lose by uni-

versalism.
In the final analysis, the question is whether pluralism is a stable option
in the United States. The answers varies, I believe, from group to group.
Amerindian groups seem too numerous, too small and too dispersed to have
any chance of ever forming viable autonomous nations within the United
States, although they still retain many of the classical characteristics of
nationhood (especially territoriality and a separate ancestry, history and
culture). Demography and geographical dispersion also limit the chances
of viable pluralism for Asian minorities. European immigrant groups, despite the much vaunted ethnic revival of the 1970s, show little inclination
to escape the melting pot which, for them, was a prelude to social mobility
and full participation in the "mainstream." Of all the ethnic groups, the
Hispanics, by virtue of growing numbers, separate culture and geographical

184
concentration, probably have the most favorable prognosis for viable pluralism in North America. After all, they are merely the northern pioneers
of a vast ethny of over 200 million in the Western Hemisphere.
By contrast, Afro-Americans owe their distinctiveness overwhelmingly
to the fact that they have been first enslaved and then stigmatized as a pariah
group. They lack a territorial base, the necessary economic and political
resources, and the cultural and linguistic pluralism ever to constitute a
successful nation. Their pluralism is strictly a structural pluralism inflicted
on them by racism. A stigma is scarcely an adequate basis for successful
nationalism. I realize that the position I am taking here is not fashionable,
but it is, I believe, realistic. Whether blacks like it or not, they have no real
option but assimilation; and whether whites like it or not, they have no
option but to accept blacks without any prejudice (or for that matter, preference), as fellow citizens. The alternative is the perpetuation of the festering
sore of racism that has for too long plagued American society.

SUGGESTED READINGS
The Hindu caste system has been extensively described by Dumont (1970), Ghurye
(1952), Hutton (1946) and Srinivas (1969). The analytical use of the concept in other
societies has given rise to a large critical literature. See, among others, Berreman
(1960), Cox (1948), De Vos and Wagatsuma (1966), Hsu (1963) and Myrdal (1944).
The best symposium on the subject was edited by de Reuck and Knight (1967), For
an interesting collection on the survival of the Hindu caste system overseas, see
Schwartz (1967).

9
CONSOCIATIONALISM

At this stage the reader may well ask whether ethnic relations can ever be
amicable. Can ethnic collectivities both retain their distinctiveness and live
in peace and harmony with other ethnic groups within the same state and
society? Since peace and harmony imply equality, the question really asks
whether stable cultural pluralism can ever lead to a stable democratic polity,
to what Lijphart (1968a, 1968b, 1977a) has called a consociational democracy and Lehmbruch (1967) a proportional democracy. The answer is a
highly qualified "yes." It is possible, but only under very special conditions,
which I will examine now.
A defining condition of consociationalism is that the cultural pluralism
must remain stable; the ethnies in presence must remain distinct from each
other. Ethnies can, of course, assimilate and loose their separate identity
and culture, a situation that I shall discuss in Chapter 10. However, in many
historical situations, people show neither any desire nor any tendency to
assimilate or acculturate to other ethnies. Basically, to anticipate the subject
of assimilation, people tend to assimilate and acculturate when their ethny
is geographically dispersed (often through migration), when they constitute
a numerical minority living among strangers, when they are in a subordinate
position and when they are allowed to assimilate by the dominant group.
Dominant minorities often retain their separate culture for many generations
as we have seen in South Africa and many other colonial settings. Dispersed
and subordinate minorities, however, typically adopt the language, culture
and the religion of the dominant majority and, unless prevented from doing
so by a restrictive racial caste system, they assimilate as well. Individuals,
in short, acculturate and assimilate when it is objectively in their interest
to do so; that is, when they see acculturation and assimilation as fitness
maximizing. The specific circumstances in which they do so will become
apparent later.

186

Here, we are dealing with situations where cultural and social pluralism
persists indefinitely, despite extensive intergroup contact, because members
of the ethnies in presence see no advantage in assimilating or acculturating.
It is important to note here that it is not the amount of intergroup contact
per se that determines the rate of acculturation and assimilation. Contact
is merely a necessary but not a sufficient condition for these to take place.
Rather, acculturation and assimilation occur, or fail to occur, depending
almost exclusively on whether there are individual advantages in undergoing changes in language, religion, culture and ultimately ethnic identity. In
the absence of such individual advantages to change, people overwhelmingly prefer to stay as they are, that is, to preserve their ethnic identity. We
have already suggested earlier (Chapter 2) why ethnic identity is so basic:
it is an extension of kinship. Therefore, we may expect an underlying conservatism and reluctance to change one's culture and ethnicity in the absence
of strong incentives to do otherwise. Indeed, this ethnic conservatism is so
great that it takes very strong individual incentives and very unfavorable
conditions for the persistence of separate ethnicity (such as geographical
dispersal) to overcome it.
Clearly, the condition of equality that is basic to an amicable system of
ethnic relations is a potent predisposition for persistent cultural pluralism.
If two or more ethnic groups have approximately the same relationship to
the means of production and an approximately equal access to the structure
of power, then no one has much to gain by joining another group. There
can be some marginal incentive to become bilingual to facilitate communication, but bilingualism is typically quite limited (both in terms of percentages of population who were bilingual and in terms of degree of
competence of individuals in their second language), seldom leading to
either complete acculturation or, much less, assimilation.
Political, economic and social equality or near equality between ethnies
sharing a common polity is thus a strong predisposing factor, making for
persistent cultural pluralism. A second main condition for permanent pluralism is, of course, territoriality. The more geographically distinct ethnies
are, the greater their chances of collective survival. Even very small minorities, like the Romansh in Switzerland or the Navaho in the United States,
can maintain their ethnic separateness for centuries if they retain a home
territory in which they remain a majority. The third condition for the persistence of cultural pluralism is a derivative of the other two. In ethnically
mixed areas (often urban areas) cultural pluralism will persist to the extent
that the groups in presence are in approximately equal numbers. In a sense,
that third condition could be considered a specification of the first one, for,
if there is great disparity in the size of the groups, equality between them
is difficult to maintain.
Indirectly, I have already defined the fundamental setting for consociational democracy. The latter is found where the social and cultural pluralism
between ethnies is permanent and where the groups in presence are approximately equal in access to power and economic resources. These con-

187
ditions, in turn, exclude conquest, which creates ethnic inequality. This
means that consociational democracies are typically established between
native groups, or, at least, between groups that are several generations away
from a conquest situation where one group is appreciably superior in wealth
or power. Consociational democracies are also more likely to be found between native groups because native groups are more likely than immigrant
groups to be territorialized. Canada, which in the 20th century increasingly
assumed the character of a consociational democracy between Francophones
and Anglophones, is an exception in that it was established by two immigrant groups, one of which conquered the other; but its ultimate success as
a stable binational state is very much in doubt as we shall see later (Brazeau
and Cloutier, 1977; Porter, 1965; Royal Commission, 1969; Smiley, 1976,
1977).

CONDITIONS FOR CONSOCIATIONAL DEMOCRACY
Let us now specify more accurately what makes consociational democracies
(CD) work. Lijphart (1977a) prefaces his latest comparative study of such
societies by saying that it is difficult but not impossible to achieve a stable
democracy in a plural society. In an earlier account, Lijphart (1968a) suggested that it must be worked at very hard with a lot of goodwill and listed
such prerequisites as an "ability to recognize the dangers inherent in a
fragmented system," "commitment to system maintenance," "ability to transcend subcultural cleavage at the elite level" and "ability to forge appropriate solutions for the demands of the subcultures."
"These four prerequisites must all be fulfilled," Lijphart says (1968a, p.
65), "if consociational democracy is to succeed." He then adds several other
"conditions favorable to consociational democracy," such as "distinct lines
of cleavage between subcultures" (so as to reduce conflict and competition
by reducing interethnic contact), "a multiple balance of power among the
subcultures" (as distinct from the hegemony of one group, or conflict between two groups), "popular attitudes favorable to government by grand
coalition," "external threats," "moderate nationalism" and "a relatively low
total load on the system" (Lijphart, 1968a, pp. 67-72). He cites Austria,
Belgium, Lebanon (an irony, it seems, after the events of 1975 and their
continuing sequels, although, of course, the Lebanese crisis was aggravated
by external factors, especially the Palestinian-Israeli conflict), The Netherlands and Switzerland as examples, and he concludes that they are all
small countries, presumably another correlate of success.
In his more recent work, Lijphart (1977a) elaborates further on the conditions favorable to stable democracy in plural societies. CDs are characterized by "grand coalition" government in which each major ethnic section
has a veto on important issues and is represented proportionately. Proportional representation by group is also stressed by Lehmbruch (1967) in his
study of Austrian and Swiss politics. In fact, Lehmbruch makes this characteristic the defining one of the type of government he called Proporzde-

188
mokratie. Other favorable conditions discussed by Lijphart include a
willingness to grant segmental autonomy to the ethnic groups under a federal
structure, the presence of cross-cutting lines of cleavage (by class, religion
and ethnicity), the existence of overarching loyalties that transcend narrow
ethnic affiliation and a tradition of elite accommodation.
My main criticism of Lijphart's view of CD is that it is more descriptive
than explanatory because so much of his analysis puts a heavy burden of
explanation on the normative values of the political culture. Clearly, my
bias is against treating such ideological or normative traits as "commitment
to system maintenance," "ability to recognize the dangers inherent in a
fragmented system" and "popular attitudes favorable to government by
grand coalition" as anything but descriptive epiphenomena.
A CD exists when the class interests of the ruling elite in preserving a
unitary multiethnic state prevail over countervailing interests to break the
state down into its ethnic components. The CD is thus a special case of
"bourgeois democracy," i.e. of a state run by a capitalist, technocratic and
bureaucratic elite through supposedly representative institutions, elected
officials and the other paraphernalia of parliamentarism. In a plural society,
however, where primordial attachments to ethnic collectivities compete
with class affiliation, the illusion of democracy can only be maintained if
the elite itself is multiethnic and in proportions approximating those of the
constituent ethnies in the general population. If that condition is not met,
then the political system is perceived by the underrepresented groups as
undemocratic because dominated by the overrepresented group or groups.
Proportionality at the elite level is thus a key feature of CDs, for it is through
proportionality that the multiethnic elite preserves the democratic fiction
of representativeness and thus its own legitimacy. If one accepts the principle of ethnic representation, then the ethnicity of a member of the ruling
class contains a validation of the right to rule.
An essential corollary of ethnic proportionality in CDs is the muting of
class conflicts. To the extent that ethnic sentiments are politicized, class
consciousness is lowered. If the main line of cleavage in a society is ethnicity
(or some feature of it, such as religion or language), if the political game is
seen primarily as an ethnic balancing act in the allocation of scarce resources, and if there are no glaring disparities in ethnic representation at
various class levels, it follows that the significance of class cleavages within
each ethny is correspondingly decreased. Under such circumstances, the
class interests of the multiethnic elite are best served by a system of CD.
The more politicized ethnicity becomes and the more ethnicized the polity,
the more attention is deflected from class conflicts and redirected (or redefined) in ethnic terms. Therefore, the less blatant the pursuit of class
interests by the elite becomes.
The possibility exists, of course, of class conflicts being expressed within
each ethnic group. In Belgium, for example, the language group cleavage is
overlaid by class-based political parties, trade unions, farmers' associations
and other interest groups that are themselves compartmentalized by eth-

189
nicity. Nevertheless, to the extent that ethnic issues are salient, the probability of class alliances across ethnic boundaries is lowered, and class
conflicts tend to remain intraethnic. Class conflicts, instead of being the
primary, macrodivisive force that they are in more ethnically homogeneous
societies (Schermerhorn, 1970), became secondary, microdivisive cleavages
within each ethny. Their political potential for organization at the level of
the central state is correspondingly weakened.
Lijphart (1977a) mentions "immobilism" as a "danger" of CDs, but, in
fact, conservatism is inherent to the system, for the reasons just mentioned.
To the extent that politics becomes an ethnic balancing act, the compromises
and accommodations for which the ruling elites of CDs are justly famous
all tend toward freezing the status quo. Since the modus operandi of the
CD is to maintain ethnic proportionality, any social, economic, linguistic
or whatever change that threatens the ethnic status quo is seen as menacing
by one or more of the ethnic collectivities, and the multiethnic elite restores
tranquility by enacting policies tending to counteract change. A mutual veto
right vested in each ethnic segment of the elite often further forestalls the
possibility of upsetting the status quo. "Immobilism," a euphemism for
conservatism, results. Furthermore, attention is deflected from issues of
class, and members of the elite are regarded not so much as a ruling class,
but as representatives of their respective ethny and watchdogs for the maintenance of ethnic balance.
A pertinent observation is in order here. There has never been a successful
multiracial democracy. The consociational model can work where the distinctions are ethnic, but seemingly not where they are racial. Some multiracial societies have attempted to present themselves as moving toward
democratic pluralism (e.g. South Africa and Rhodesia), but such "multiracialism" was in fact a thinly disguised attempt to perpetuate the domination
of one racial group over the others. When such societies were decolonized,
as in Algeria, the sham of multiracial democracy, parallel development and
the like quickly collapsed, and the society either became de facto monoracial
through emigration of the former ruling minorities, or the political system
became nonracial.
Equally invidious and unworkable are the attempts, often made in compromises of decolonization, to vest certain minority privileges and rights
to formerly dominant racial groups. The reluctant concession of a 20%
representation in the Zimbabwe Parliament opportunistically accepted by
Mugabe and Nkomo in the 1980 compromise, for example, cannot be expected to survive independence under a black government very long, because it constitutes an affront to the black population.
Significantly, the platform of virtually all liberation movements in southern Africa has been nonracial and antiracist. With a few partial exceptions
(such as the splinter Pan-African Congress in South Africa), these liberation
movements like the MPLA in Angola, FRELIMO in Mozambique, the African
National Congress in South Africa, SWAPO in Namibia and ZANU and
ZAPU in Zimbabwe have advocated not black government but majority

190
government on the principle of one-man-one-vote, including the expatriate
minorities. The cynic might well argue that demographic reality makes such
universalism totally safe, as the practical difference between black and majority government is negligible, but the principle of nonracialism is, nevertheless, politically sound.
There have, of course, been a number of countries in which people of
different "racial" stocks have managed to live in relative harmony. I am not
arguing that phenotypic differences preclude peaceful coexistence; far from
it. What I am saying, however, is that the consociational model has never
been successfully applied to multiracial societies. Those societies, like Mexico, Brazil, Hawaii and many others, where phenotypically distinct people
have lived side-by-side in relative harmony have all been societies where
no political recognition was given to race, where racial groups have not
become organized as political constituencies, and where the state has legally
and officially been nonracial, not multiracial.
In the previous chapter, I analyzed the misguided effort in the United
States to try to institutionalize a consociational model of racial representation by giving increasing official and legal recognition to racial categories,
thereby encouraging racial groups to become increasingly self-conscious
and organized for political action. The basic reason why racial consociationalism cannot succeed in creating a more egalitarian society is that race
as a social category is always invidious and that, therefore, any policies
based on the recognition of race inevitably have stigmatizing consequences.
This is doubly the case in situations, such as in the United States, where
objective ethnic differences between "racial" groups are minimal; in the
nearly complete absence of ethnic markers between groups, racial markers
become almost purely invidious. The only purpose for retaining racial markers is to be discriminatory. Even "reverse discrimination" cannot be anything but a demeaning form of paternalism since it implies inferiority.
Ethnic distinctions can be made invidious, of course, but they are not
necessarily so. There is nothing invidious, for instance, in an Italian-speaking Swiss child attending an Italian-language school or a Franco-Canadian
child a French-medium school; but there is something intrinsically invidious in an Afro-American child attending a black school or, for that matter,
in his being accepted on special terms in a white school. Ethnicity can be,
in special circumstances, a viable basis for CD, but race cannot. Race is
necessarily stigmatizing; not so with ethnicity.*
So far, we have associated CDs with "bourgeois democracies," and indeed
most examples of it have developed in capitalist societies like Switzerland,
*It was, of course, the implicit realization of this fundamental distinction between race and
ethnicity that led to repeated endeavors by Afro-Americans to redefine themselves in ethnic
rather than racial terms, by claiming a separate language ("black English"), religion (Black Muslims), culture ("black music"), history and so on. These attempts failed, in part because the
objective basis for these cultural distinctions was tenuous and in part because the overwhelmingly
dominant whites continued to define blacks as a pariah caste, not as a separate ethny. Powerless
minorities find it very difficult to redefine themselves in terms of their own choosing, precisely
because they are powerless.

191
Belgium or Canada. The model of consociationalism, however, is not incompatible with a "people's democracy." Several socialist countries, most
notably Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, have evolved toward consociational types of polity, that is, polities officially and legally recognizing
ethnicity as a basis of political organization, representation and incorporation into the multinational state—ruled by a multiethnic bureaucratic and
technocratic elite.
Where some nationalities were initially greatly overrepresented (as were
the European and especially Russian groups in the Soviet Union), attempts
were made, as the Communist bureaucracy became firmly entrenched, to
co-opt underrepresented minorities into leading positions. This had the
double effect of creating a Communist Party elite that transcends ethnic
boundaries and perpetuates its class interests, creating the illusion of a
representative democracy. Consociational mechanisms of elite accommodation are, in fact, remarkably similar in "people's" and "bourgeois" democracies, and they achieve in both cases an impressive degree of
"immobilism." Consociationalism serves the elites quite well in both cases.
To recapitulate argument thus far, consociationalism is a special form of
elite domination based on ethnic proportionality. It can work if it is based
on ethnicity (or some special feature of it, such as language or religion), but
not if it is based on race; race is intrinsically invidious and, therefore, cannot
become a principle of egalitarian group association. Consociationalism
seems to work equally well and remarkably similarly in both capitalist and
socialist societies. The consequences in both cases seem to be conservative
because it reduces class consciousness by politicizing ethnicity.
Unfortunately for the multiethnic elites whose interests CD serves, CD
has its problems. To these I now turn. Indeed, there is an inherent contradiction in consociationalism. On the one hand, the elite, by politicizing
ethnicity, become the arbiters of an ethnic balancing act that detracts attention from class conflicts and promotes conservatism. On the other hand,
ethnicity is such a powerful sentiment that, once mobilized, it cannot always
be controlled. When counterelites (often a semiprofessional petty bourgeoisie of school teachers, students and other intellectuals) arise, which have
an interest in challenging the status quo, ethnicity can easily be fanned into
raging separatism, escalating to civil war. The recent history of Lebanon,
long considered a model CD in the Third World (Binder, 1966; Lijphart,
1977a; D. A. Smock and A. C. Smock, 1975), shows how fragile consociationalism is when challenged by nationalist counterelites, including those
created by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The intelligentsia—frequently a
disaffected, underemployed, impecunious, insecure group—often see in
nationalism a means to challenge the "immobilism" of CDs, to attack the
ruling elite and to substitute itself as the new elite of the nationalist movement.
What are the conditions that make for stability (or "immobilism") in CDs?
More precisely, under what set of circumstances are the interests of the
multiethnic ruling elite in keeping the consociational structure greatest and

192
most difficult to challenge? The defining characteristics of CD with which
I began this chapter are that the constituent ethnies not be in a hierarchy
of wealth or prestige, and that their cultural pluralism remain relatively
stable. If the first condition of ethnic equality or near-equality is missing,
the system cannot be called democratic, and if the cultural pluralism is not
permanent, the system ceases to be consociational. Given then these two
defining characteristics and restrictions, the following seem to be the most
important conditions favoring consociationalism.
1. Some degree of territorial interpenetration of the ethnies. The more people live outside their home territory, the more scattered ethnic enclaves
are, and, the more people live in multiethnic cities, the more difficult
territorial partition becomes. Since the practicality of partition is a main
determinant in the successful creation of new ethnic states, the more
chaotic the ethnic map looks, the greater the prospects for consociationalism. For cultural pluralism to persist however, the ethnies in presence
must retain some territorial base, otherwise assimilation results and the
state is, by definition, no longer consociational.
2. Genetic interpenetration of the ethnies. The more intermarriage there is
between ethnies, the more kin ties cut across ethnic ones—and the more
people of ambiguous status are created who cannot be neatly categorized
by ethnicity. If there is completely random intermarriage, however, cultural pluralism itself disappears and, with assimilation, we no longer
have consociationalism.
3. Functional interpenetration of the ethnies. The more institutions the
ethnies share, the more difficult it becomes to disentangle a society along
ethnic lines.
The first and second points are self-explanatory, but the third requires
some elaboration because functional interpenetration takes many forms.
Politically, the state apparatus itself is, by definition, shared in CDs. Therefore, the more centralized the state is, the more there is to share—and the
more difficult separatism. Typically, early steps of ethnic separatism take
the form of demands for greater decentralization and regional autonomy,
e.g. the recent process of "devolution" in the United Kingdom. Also, the
more powerful and centralized the state is, the more important and the
larger its capital city. If the latter is ethnically mixed, as it frequently is,
this is another contributing factor making partition difficult. A powerful
centralized state is by definition in a better position to squelch separatism,
and it creates a large bureaucratic apparatus with a vested interest in the
status quo. The ideal political conditions for CD are, therefore, a centralized
bureaucratic state with a large multiethnic capital and a large powerful
multiethnic civil service and military forces.
Functional interpenetration is also frequently economic. The more economic interests straddle the ethnic fence, the more multiethnic the moneyed
and industrial bourgeoisie are, and the more banking, industry and commerce cross ethnic boundaries, the better the prospects for CD. If, in short,

193
the economic interests of the bourgeoisie coincide with those of the bureaucratic elite in maintaining a unitary multiethnic state, these economic
and political interest groups will tend to coalesce to make it work. However,
economic interpenetration does not stop at the elite level. Trade unions and
professional associations, for example, to the extent that they stradle ethnic
lines, also share an interest in the consociational status quo. In short, consociationalism is fostered by the cross-cutting of ethnic and class lines.
Beyond the political and economic spheres, interpenetration can be social
and cultural. For example, several ethnies may share a common religion
(as in Belgium), or religious groups can overlap with ethnic ones (as in
Canada, where there are large numbers of both Francophone and Anglophone Catholics, though few Francophone Protestants and Jews). Two
closely related cultural groups can also appreciate each other's music, art
and other cultural institutions. Classical music concerts or art exhibits in
Brussels, for example, are as likely to attract Flemings as Walloons. Brussels
as the capital of a little Flemish state could not be the great cultural center
that it presently is. Therefore, aficionados of "high culture" have an interest
in the status quo that transcends their ethnicity.
In a sense, all these favorable conditions for CD are self-evident to the
point of being tautological. Consociationalism works to the extent that the
ethnic collectivities are: (1) not too different from each other to start with;
(2) united by a multiple network of cross-cutting ties and affiliations; and
(3) somewhat territorially mixed. Most simply put, ethnic groups stick together if the alternative is difficult, impractical, costly and painful, especially to the elite in whose interests the system is maintained. There is no
magic to consociationalism—not even a sophisticated political theory. Consociationalism, for all its limitations, inefficiencies, particularisms and irrationalities, is simply the best arrangement possible in situations of permanent ethnic pluralism and interdependence where the alternatives (e.g.
a la Lebanon) are too awful to contemplate.
Consociationalism thus prevails in situations of ethnic equality or nearequality; ethnic association is accepted because it does not entail ethnic
domination and exploitation. Consociationalism is most likely to persist
where a substantial degree of cultural pluralism is self-perpetuating, but
where, at the same time, the ethnies interpenetrate and are interdependent
in mutually beneficial ways. The mutuality of benefits in consociationalism
also implies ethnic equality, of course. In the last analysis, consociationalism is based on reciprocity at the ethnic level (which does not preclude
exploitation in class terms).
CASE STUDIES OF CONSOCIATIONAL STATES
Switzerland
Switzerland, a country of some six million inhabitants in the heart of Western Europe, is often mentioned as the oldest, stablest and the most peaceful,
successful and affluent CD in the world (Dunn, 1972; Gretler and Mandl,

194
1973; Gruner, 1969; Kohn 1956; Lehmbruch, 1967; Lijphart, 1977a; Nordlinger, 1972; Weilenmann, 1951). It is made up of four indigenous language
groups: the Germans make up 75% of the natives; the French, 20%; the
Italians, 4%; and the Romansh, 1%. Postwar prosperity brought in a large
influx of "guest workers," mostly from Italy and other Mediterranean countries. They now make up 13% of the total population, but they are largely
excluded from political life since they are foreigners. If one includes guest
workers in the linguistic breakdown, however, the Italian-speaking group
more than doubles from 4% to nearly 10% of the total population, and the
German group is reduced to 69% (Lijphart, 1977a).
Religiously too, Switzerland is divided between Catholics (42%) and Protestants (58%). While the Italians are nearly all Catholics, large numbers of
both French and German Swiss belong to both religions. Thus, there is a
substantial degree of cross-cutting cleavages between religion and language,
an important condition for CD. Religious cleavages were salient during the
wars of religion in the 17th century and, indeed, even up to the framing of
the Constitution of 1848, but they have receded in importance since.
The great secret of Swiss success in their consociational experiment is
that Switzerland is one of those rare multiethnic states that did not originate
either in conquest or in the breakdown of multinational empires. Instead,
it grew over a 700-year period as a loose confederation of "hill tribes" (as
they would be called if they were located in Asia) that banded together for
mutual defense. Like many other hill tribes elsewhere in the world, the
Swiss had a dual advantage in resisting outside conquest: favorable terrain
and lack of natural resources. They were simply not worth conquering. Like
other hill tribes, too, they developed special ecological adaptations, providing highly specialized goods and services to their lowland neighbors.
During the formative centuries of the Confederacy, Switzerland specialized
in the monoculture of cannon fodder for the warring European states. Later
it turned to more pacific ventures such as the manufacturing of watches and
the management of shady foreigners' ill-gotten capital.
Switzerland, in short, is a very special case. It escaped conquest and was
allowed by its neighbors to grow because it was difficult and unprofitable
to invade and because it provided its neighbors valuable services. If it had
not existed, it would have had to be invented. (Lebanon, incidentally, during
its 1943-1975 interlude of CD, also provided banking services to its neighbors; but being a fragile and artificial state born out of the disintegration of
the Ottoman Empire and nurtured under a French mandate, the consociational experiment ended in cataclysmic collapse in 1975, as it was drawn
into the vortex of the Near-Eastern crisis and the Palestinian-Israeli conflict.)
From the very start, Switzerland satisfied the condition of ethnic equality
as very few multiethnic states do. This is not to say that there are not great
internal disparities in the distribution of wealth, both by region and by
social class (Table I). In 1977, the richest canton, Basel-town, had 2.75 times
the per capita income (34600 francs) of the poorest canton, Obwald (12600
francs). Basically, the densely populated, urbanized, northwestern third of
the country (on an arc from Geneva to Zurich) is much richer than the more

195
TABLE I. Swiss Cantons by Income, Language and Religion"
Per capita income
1977 (francs)

Largest language
group (%)''

Largest religious
group (%)b

Basel (city)
Zug
Geneva
Zurich
Basel (country)
Aargau
Vaud
Schaffhausen
Glarus
Neuchatel
Solothurn
Berne'
Thurgau
Graubiinden
St. Gallen
Ticino
Nidwalden
Lucerne
Appenzell A.R.
Uri
Valais
Schwyz
Fribourg
Appenzell I.R.
Obwald

34600
31300
30200
25100
22000
19900
19500
19200
19100
18400
18200
17700
17600
17400
16900
16700
16500
16400
16300
15200
15100
14900
14700
12800
12600

94 G
98 G
83 F
96 G
97 G
98 G
88 F
98 G
98 G
86 F
97 G
84 G
99 G
60 G
99 G
89 1
99 G
98 G
99 G
98 G
64 F
99 G
65 F
100 G
99 G

66 P
84 C
57 C
74 P
74 P
58 P
79 P
79 P
68 P
78 P
56 C
85 P
67 P
53 P
60 C
93 C
92 C
86 C
84 P
93 C
96 C
94 C
87 C
96 C
97 C

Switzerland

20500

75 G

58 P

Canton

Sources: Federal Statistical Office; Union Bank of Switzerland.
"Citizens only.
''Code: G = German; F = French; I = Italian; P = Protestant; C = Catholic.
'Before secession of jura.

rural and mountainous center and southeast. Regional differences in levels
of development are much greater in Switzerland than, for example, in the
United States, where in 1970 the richest state (Alaska) had a mean family
income ($13,900) of only 1.90 times that of the poorest state (Mississippi,
$7,300).
However, luckily for Switzerland, these regional disparities in income
cross-cut ethnic differences. There is a roughly proportional distribution of
rich and poor cantons in the Francophone and Germanophone areas. Of the
ten richest cantons, three are French and seven German. Of the ten poorest
cantons, two are French, seven German and one Italian. (Ticino, the Italian
canton, actually ranks 16th, i.e. near the middle.) All four of the two richest
and the two poorest cantons are German. Religiously, there is a distinct

196
tendency for Catholic areas to be poorer than Protestant areas. Nine of the
ten richest cantons have Protestant majorities, while nine of the ten poorest
are overwhelmingly Catholic. However, as each canton has its class inequalities that cross-cut both religious and ethnic lines, the issue of religious
disparities in wealth rarely became politicized, except indirectly in 1847,
when it threatened to split the Confederacy between the more prosperous,
liberal, urban and Protestant northwest, and the poorer, more rural, conservative and Catholic center and southeast.
Another crucial element of Swiss equality is dialectical. In most parts of
the world where both "high" and "low" dialects of a language are spoken
these dialects are stratified. Typically, the educated, urbanized, upper
classes speak a prestigeful dialect that is identified with the standard "national" language, with the educational system, with the press and with all
the institutions of "high culture." Conversely, the local, rural dialects are
spoken mostly by peasants and the urban working class and are stigmatized,
officially unrecognized and often unwritten.
In the German part of Switzerland, local dialects are still very much alive
and are all quite divergent from standard "High German" (or Schriftdeutsch,
as it is sometimes called in Switzerland). High German is the official language of school and urban "high culture," but local dialects are proudly
spoken at all class levels without social stigma. At least in the urban areas,
practically everyone is "diglossic" (i.e. speaks fluently both the standardized
language and the local dialect), readily shifting back and forth between
them, irrespective of social class. The upper classes speak local dialects
as unself-consciously as the lower classes, and dialect is not a basis for
drawing invidious class distinctions. Unfamiliarity with High German marks
one as an unschooled person, but the phenomenon has become rare in the
urban areas. This relative lack of association between dialect and class
within the German ethny and the relative lack of dialectical differentiation
within the French- and Italian-speaking population are additional factors
tending to make the spoken tongue classless and thus ethnicity noninvidious.
The Confederacy was a league of hill tribes born out of mutual interest
and convenience, which only in 1798, under the French-controlled Helvetic
Republic, came to resemble a modern state, gradually starting to do more
complex tasks such as running a railway, a post-office, an army and a diplomatic corps at the federal level. Even by the standards of other federal
states, Switzerland is still extremely decentralized. Of all government revenues, the Swiss federal government spends only 61%, compared to 65%
in Canada; 74% in West Germany; 77% in the United States and 84% in
Austria (Lijphart, 1977a). The basic unit of political life in Switzerland is
still the canton, despite a gradual growth in federal functions.
This great degree of decentralization, however, seems to contradict the
condition of functional interpenetration that, I suggested, favored consociationalism. If each canton is largely autonomous, except in a few essential
common services, what holds them together in the confederacy? The answer
is, of course, the convenience of these common services. The ethnic diversity

197
of Switzerland is only incidental to the federalism; it does not constitute
the basis of it. Switzerland is a confederation of cantons, not of ethnic
groups, and as such Switzerland does not really qualify as a true CD. The
Swiss state gives no formal recognition to ethnicity as a basis of political
incorporation, citizenship, legal rights and obligations, land tenure rights,
allocation of resources, assignment to school systems—any of the usual
bones of contention in multiethnic states. Switzerland as a whole practically
shows none of the formal characteristics of a CD. The state does not need
to be a CD, because, being so little of a state, there is so little at stake.
If one is to look for CD in Switzerland, one must look at the cantonal
level. What does one find there? Of the 26 cantons (or more precisely, 22
cantons and four half-cantons) in the Confederation, 23 have more than 80%
of their population speaking the same language and 17 are over 95% monolingual (Table I). Berne, which was officially bilingual before the secession
of the Jura, was 84% German-speaking, and its official bilingualism did not
prevent the French Catholic northern Jura from agitating for, and eventually
achieving, separate cantonal status (Mayer, 1968). Twenty-two cantons are
officially monolingual and, thus, hardly consociational. That leaves only
three cantons that qualify as CDs, Valais (64% French), Fribourg (65%
French) and Graubiinden (60% German) (Table 1).
Religiously, there is a little more diversity at the cantonal level than there
is in language. Still, the Catholics who are only 42% of the country's population make up over 80% of the total in ten cantons. On the whole, the
cantons tend to be much more homogeneous, both linguistically and religiously, than the country as a whole. Most cantons are not good examples
of CD. Of the few that are, one (Berne) has been beleaguered by separatist
demands by its French Catholic minority in the Jura, which recently
achieved the status of a separate canton. Graubiinden is the most diverse
canton, being trilingual and nearly equally divided between Catholics and
Protestants.
In short, the success of Switzerland is not so much a success in CD as a
successful adaptation of isolated, autonomous, marginal groups loosely
banded together to provide very specialized services to their neighbors.
Switzerland is a very pleasant country, but it is not much of a state by
modern standards. Perhaps it is such a pleasant country because it is not
much of a state. The real capital of Switzerland is not Berne, but Zurich,
and Zurich life revolves not around the government but around the banks
on or near the Paradenplatz. The other contender for cosmopolitanism is
Geneva, a lakeside resort for bureaucrats of international agencies. Both
Zurich and Geneva are, of course, overwhelmingly monolingual, and face
none of the problems of consociationalism.

Belgium
With its ten million people, its high per capita income, its high degree of
industrialization and urbanization and its strategic location between the
great powers of Western Europe, Belgium is not quite as inconsequential as

198
its small size (some 32,000 square kilometers) suggests. Lacking defensible
boundaries, and being a rich prize and a strategic path of invasion, Belgium,
unlike Switzerland, was repeatedly conquered, fought over and incorporated
in a succession of larger states: the Roman Empire, the Carolingian Empire,
the Grand Duchy of Burgundy, the Hapsburg Empire, France and The Netherlands. It did not achieve its present form until 1830, when it seceded from
the Kingdom of The Netherlands, a shotgun wedding of Holland and Belgium imposed by the Congress of Vienna in 1815, in the aftermath of Napoleon's defeat at Waterloo (a Belgian village some 20 kilometers from
Brussels, incidentally).
Economically, Flanders, the northern half of today's Belgium, had long
been one of the most dynamic parts of Europe. Flemish cities like Ghent,
Bruges, Ypres and, later, Antwerp and Brussels were among the most prosperous in Europe between the 14th and the 17th centuries, but that economic
prosperity did not translate into political independence and overseas colonial expansion, as was the case with Holland to the north. The Revolution
of 1830 was not a classical nationalist movement at all, and the state it
created made neither geographical nor cultural sense. Despite a distinguished Belgian historian's massive attempt to "prove" the long-standing
existence of a Belgian nation (Pirenne, 1930-1932), there was, and still is,
no such thing.
Belgium has no "natural" boundaries. The plains of Flanders are wide
open to the north and south into Holland and France; the rolling wooded
hills of the Ardennes extend into France, Luxembourg and Germany; the
main rivers run through Belgium, starting in France and ending in a vast
estuary in Holland. Belgium makes no ethnic sense either. The "linguistic
boundary" runs from east to west and bisects the country into a Flemish
north and a Walloon south with the bilingual capital of Brussels enclosed
in Flemish territory. An ethnic division should have left Flanders with The
Netherlands and Wallonia with France. Belgium was not even the product
of a religious cleavage, for, even though it is overwhelmingly Catholic (at
least nominally so), the split with The Netherlands left millions of Catholics
on the Dutch side of the border.
The bourgeoisie that led the Revolution and ruled the new country declared Belgium a constitutional monarchy, but it even had to go shopping
abroad for a king, finally deciding on a German princeling, Leopold of SaxenCoburg-Gotha who was conveniently in the market for a kingdom. (He had
previously been offered the Greek crown, but declined.) The only thing that
Belgium had going for itself in 1830 was a thriving economy at the forefront
of the industrial revolution. The coal mines of the Meuse valley led to the
early development of steel and other heavy industry in Wallonia, and, since
the early 19th century, Belgium has remained one of the world's leading
industrial states. Under its profligate and megalomaniacal king, Leopold II,
Belgium even launched on a colonial adventure in Africa and acquired the
vast, mineral-rich Belgian Congo (80 times the size of Belgium) which it
kept from 1885 to 1960, first as a private domain of the King and then as

199
a Belgian colony. Thus 19th-century Belgium had all the trappings of a
prosperous and even relatively important state: all it lacked was nationhood.
Its motto, L'union fait la force ("There is strength in unity."), is still more
of a pious wish (some would even say, an ironic joke) than a reality.
Yet, Belgium muddled through 150 years of independence and survived
two World Wars, in each case with a German invasion and four years of
military occupation. It has thrived from conflict to conflict, and all the
linguistic, class, religious and party-political quarrels and street demonstrations have yet to produce a single fatality (if one excludes the settlement
of scores with collaborators after the two World Wars).
Ethnic conflicts in Belgium are poorly understood abroad because of the
extremely intricate and changing relationships among class, religion and
ethnicity (Clough, 1930; du Roy, 1968; Huggett, 1969; Lorwin, 1966, 1971,
1972; Outers, 1968; Petersen, 1975; Tindermans, 1971; Willemsen, 1969;
Zolberg, 1974, 1975, 1977). In order to understand present day ethnic conflicts, we must trace back their history several centuries. The linguistic
frontier—the invisible line that separates Flemings in the north from Walloons in the south—is roughly 1500 years old. It marked the boundary,
during the late Roman period, between the Latinized Celts, who eventually
came to speak modern French, and the Germanic Franks, who today speak
dialects of Dutch, a language derived from low German.
That linguistic frontier does not correspond to any feature of topography.
In places, it even bisects villages. Yet, it has been remarkably stable and
enduring. Except for the suburban extension of an increasingly Francophone
Brussels, which encroaches on neighboring Flemish territory, the linguistic
frontier has barely shifted over the centuries. The most visible clue that one
crosses the frontier is a shift in the language of commercial billboards and
roads signs. Much to the confusion of foreign motorists, traveling, say, toward Mons, Courtrai, Tirlemont, Malines, Louvain or Liege, these cities
suddenly metamorphose into Bergen, Kortrijk, Tienen, Mechelen, Leuven
or Luik, or vice versa. Only officially bilingual Brussels has bilingual road
signs, but during periods of nationalist fervor, rival youth gangs often spray
paint over the offending language with the result that both languages are
sometimes obliterated.
If the division were simply an ethnic one, language conflicts in Belgium
would not be nearly as bitter as they have been. Unfortunately, they have
been heavily overlaid with class conflicts, though less so today than before
World War II. Starting in the 14th and 15th centuries, when Flanders was
part of the Grand Duchy of Burgundy and when the Grand Dukes established
their French-speaking court in the flourishing Flemish city of Ghent, the
use of French began to spread among the nobility of Flanders. After the
French Revolution and during the Napoleonic period, when Belgium was
occupied by the French, the use of French as the prestige language of the
ruling class gradually spread from the aristocracy to the bourgeoisie. By the
time of independence in 1830, the bourgeoisie that led the revolution, although in good part of Flemish ethnic origin, was using French almost

200
exclusively as the language of administration, higher education, justice,
"high culture" and other aspects of public life. The Gallicized Flemish
bourgeoisie continued for the most part to be bilingual, but, much like their
Russian counterparts under the Czars, they spoke French among themselves
and spoke Flemish (as the various local dialects of Dutch are known in
Belgium) with their social inferiors.
The bourgeois state established by the 1830 Revolution, then, was in a
sense a classical CD in that its ruling class was drawn from both the Walloon
and the Flemish parts of the country, and in that the class interests of the
bourgeoisie transcended any sectional ethnic interests. The main cleavage
within the ruling class was not ethnic. Indeed, they all agreed on the use
of French as the dominant language, caring little about ethnic nationalism.
The political split was between liberals and conservatives, a cleavage which,
in Belgium, revolved principally around religion.
Since Belgium has always been overwhelmingly Catholic (over 95%, not
including the "guest workers," many of whom are Muslim), at least nominally so, it may seem odd that Belgians find it possible to quarrel over
religion. Yet they do so with great alacrity. The perennial quarrel is between
the liberals (and later the socialists) who, in the tradition of the French
Revolution, advocate a complete separation of Church and State, and the
conservatives who rally around the Catholic Church and oppose such a
separation.
An important sector of the bourgeoisie has always been militantly anticlerical; some of them have been associated with Freemasonry (an anticlerical organization in Catholic countries), and the Liberal Party has been
their political home. In the late 19th century, as the hitherto limited suffrage
was extended to the working class, the Socialist Party grew in strength and
joined the anticlerical camp, eventually to supplant the Liberals as the main
opposition group to the Catholics (much as the Labourites gradually eclipsed
the Liberals in Great Britain).
The main bone of contention in the "religious question" in Belgium has
traditionally been the issue of state support for religious (i.e. Catholic)
schools. The compromise is that the Belgian state supports a double system
of schools: lay schools where no religion is taught, and religious schools,
largely run by the Catholic clergy, who are paid salaries as teachers by the
state. Except for religion, the school program is identical in the two systems,
and state inspectors control curricula in both.
Over time, the conservatives became more and more reformist, and the
present Catholic party, called the Social Christian Party, is in fact a welfarestate oriented Christian Democratic group much like its German and Italian
counterparts. As for the Socialists, they have moved toward the right, now
representing the conservative wing of the Social Democratic movement. The
Liberals, now a small minority, stand ideologically to the right of both major
parties, and represent the interests of the disgruntled, anticlerical bourgeoisie. Since World War II, Belgian politics, like those of other Western European states, are no longer sharply polarized along class lines. Each major

201
party (Socialist and Social Christian) has a whole set of parallel institutions
including schools, universities and trade unions, serving as a vast patronage
network. The bourgeoisie gradually co-opted the labor elite, and, as the
proletariat underwent a process of embourgeoisement, Belgium became a
classical welfare state run consensually by overlapping elites made up of
the traditional moneyed bourgeoisie, the trade union elite, the professionals
and technocrats, the politicians and the ever-growing state bureaucracy.
Politically, Belgium has three groups or zuilen (Dutch for "pillars"), as
Lijphart (1968a) designates these complex, multi-institutional social formations that are at once political parties, trade union movements, cultural
and educational centers and social clubs for the elite: Catholics and Socialists, with a much smaller Liberal group. Differences in ideology have
become quite inconsequential. Both major parties are basically centrist,
welfare-state democrats. Their only residual difference of any importance
is the "religious question" (i.e. the school issue), and even that conflict has
become so ritualized and so deadlocked in "immobilism" as to lead cynics
to believe that the two elites keep the conflict alive merely to justify their
separate existence to the voters.
How does all this relate to the ethnic issue? These political cleavages and
the religious question linked with them, cross-cut the Flemish-Walloon
division. Although the Flemings are overrepresented in the Catholic camp
and the Walloons in the Socialist and Liberal groups, large numbers of each
ethnic group are present in each of the three zuilen. Indeed, each political
party is organized into two ethnic wings, presents ethnically balanced tickets
at elections and plays with alacrity the game of proportional ethnic representation. More than any other factor, it is that cross-cutting cleavage between ethnicity and other political issues that holds Belgium together as a
CD.
The political and economic elite are represented in all three zuilen and,
having reduced to insignificance their ideological differences, have an increasing class interest in keeping the ever growing and more powerful state
apparatus together. Belgium always was a highly centralized state, modeled
largely on Napoleonic France. Brussels is a large, affluent, cosmopolitan
city and is the seat not only of the Belgian government but of a vast international elite of "Eurocrats." (Both NATO and European Common Market
headquarters are located in Brussels.) Secession of either Flanders or Wallonia would spell disaster for Brussels and would not solve the "language
problem," as Brussels itself, though supposedly bilingual, is in fact a Francophone island in a Flemish sea. Best estimates (Petersen, 1975) put the
Dutch-speaking population of Brussels at less than 20%.
However, the rule of this multiparty, bi-ethnic elite has not been unchallenged by both Flemish and Walloon nationalists. In recent times, the
separatist challenges crested in the 1968 elections when nationalist parties
managed to win nearly a fifth of the seats in Parliament. A new compromise
was reached, transforming Belgium into a semifederal state with two monolingual autonomous cultural regions and a bilingual capital. This compro-

202
mise seems to have defused the language question—at least for the time
being.
Precise figures on the ethnic composition of Belgium are impossible to
obtain, for the language question is so controversial that the Belgian census
has not dared to bring up the matter since 1947. The closest one can come
to current ethnic composition is by region. Fifty three percent of the population lives in the Dutch-speaking part of Belgium, 31% in the Frenchspeaking area and 16% in Brussels (du Roy, 1968). If one accepts the estimate that Brussels is about 80% French, Dutch speakers thus find themselves in a clear but not overpowering majority of 56% in the country at
large. These figures correspond rather closely to those of the last linguistic
census taken in 1947, when 42% reported their home language as only or
mainly French; 53% Dutch, 1% German and 4% other languages. These
figures, however, hide many complexities, giving only a rough idea of the
ethnic situation.
We must return to the late 19th century for a better understanding of
Belgian ethnic and class relations. We saw that Belgium was founded and
ruled by a bourgeoisie that, although drawn from both Flanders and Wallonia, had become French-speaking and used French as the official language.
The class domination of the French-speaking bourgeoisie, and hence the
social superiority of French, was buttressed by a franchise that until 1893
limited voting to the propertied classes. Even then, universal manhood
suffrage was diluted by plural voting for the bourgeoisie; equal manhood
suffrage only came in 1919 (Lorwin, 1972). (Women had to wait until the
1920s.) The Belgian Constitution granted everyone the freedom to speak his
own language, but French supremacy was evident everywhere. It began to
be opposed in the 1840s, and, in 1856, the government appointed a commission to study the "linguistic question." In 1886, a Flemish Academy
was set up, and, in 1898, an act of Parliament officially established equality
of the two national languages. However, this act largely remained a dead
letter until 1922, when Dutch was made the official administrative language
north of the linguistic frontier and French south of it. Even then, the gains
were only gradual and the bitterness remained. Not until 1930, for example,
did the University of Ghent, a state university in an entirely Flemish city,
adopt Dutch as the sole language of instruction. Only then, did the internationally famous Catholic University of Louvain, in the Flemish city of
Leuven, begin to be bilingual; hitherto, it had been almost entirely French
(Lorwin, 1972). As for the official Dutch translation of the 1830 Constitution,
it had to wait until 1967 (Lorwin, 1972).
It must again be stressed that this Flemish nationalist movement, in the
19th and early 20th centuries, was much more an expression of class resentment against the Frenchified Flemish bourgeoisie than an anti-Walloon
movement. It was not the Walloons in the south who were mostly resented,
but the French-speaking bourgeoisie of Flanders that was favoring French
as a tool of class domination. The Flemish nationalist movement was led
mostly by the upwardly mobile, educated, petty bourgeoisie of students,

203
teachers, lower clerics and professionals, who often came from peasant or
working class origins and bitterly resented the status of French as an elite
language and the indignity of second-class ethnicity in their own territory.
Indeed, that class found itself in a bitter dilemma for, to be individually
successful in their process of upward mobility, they had to learn French,
but their failure to master French as native speakers exposed them to ridicule. The opportunists sought and often achieved assimilation into the
Francophone bourgeoisie; the others saw in Flemish nationalism the only
dignified alternative to class snobbery.*
Since World War II, a number of important changes have taken place.
Largely through the efforts of Flemish nationalists, the status of Dutch has
improved markedly, and the bourgeoisie of the Flemish cities no longer
finds it de bon ton to speak Frencn. Indeed, in large Flemish cities like
Antwerp and Ghent where French was commonly heard in the upper classes,
the use of French has greatly declined and English is now often preferred
as a neutral second language. With the democratization of manners that
*If I may introduce some autobiographical recollections here, I remember very clearly from my
own childhood in the 1930s and 1940s how invidious this bilingualism was. My paternal grandparents, who lived in the solidly Flemish city of Ghent, belonged to this gallicized Flemish
bourgeoisie. They were fluent in both Flemish and French, but they always spoke French to their
class equals and to members of the family, and looked down on Flemish as an inferior, uncultured,
though earthy and colorful, peasant dialect. The two family maids spoke little French, and my
grandparents always spoke Flemish with them, as they did with shopkeepers, tradesmen, workmen and their tenant farmers (some of whom were distant kin).
My grandfather, who was a physician, even segregated his patients by class. Next to the doorbell,
a mirror reflected the image of the visitor to a basement window. The maid, before opening, took
a quick look and, judging by style of dress or previous acquaintance, decided whether to take the
patient to a sparsely furnished working-class waiting room where nothing but Flemish was
spoken, or to the plush family parlor where only French was heard. My grandfather even had
separate consulting rooms for his two classes of patients; his entire social and professional life
was rigidly segregated, both linguistically and socially.
In fact, my grandfather whose family had become Frenchified in his grandparents' generation
spoke Flemish less readily than my grandmother whose father was the first member of herfamily
to speak French. She had many rich peasant kinsmen who were monolingual in Flemish and
who regarded my grandfather as somewhat of a snob. When my father married a Frenchwoman
from Paris and settled in Brussels, French completely dominated our household. My father
continued to be fluent in Flemish but seldom spoke it. and I learned it in school, reluctantly, and
as a foreign language. Like my father. I went to a French-medium elementary and secondary
school where Dutch was taught as the "other" national language, but where social prejudices
ascribed distinctly lower status to Dutch. (The official, standardized, written version of Flemish
taught in the schools is called Nederitinds, a language very close to the standard Dutch of The
Netherlands.)
I remember how my Dutch teacher was treated as a social pariah by his colleagues and was
mercilessly ridiculed by the pupils. There was even a form of snobbery consisting in documenting
how badly one did in the Dutch course, which, unlike French, Latin, Greek, history and mathematics, was considered pas serieux, roughly on par with physical education. Any suggestion by
our hapless Dutch teacher that the great 17th century Dutch dramatist Vondel was the peer of
Milton, Dante or Racine, excited peals of hilarity and merciless satire from us. The mainstay of
our ridicule of him was to parody his accent in French. I also have mortifying memories of my
French maternal relatives turning the tables of linguistic snobbery on me and making fun of my
"Belgian accent." (Belgians in France are often the butt of what in the United States are "Polish"
jokes.) My French grandfather, a distinguished biologist, professor at the Sorbonne and member
of the French Academy of Sciences, obviously considered my Belgian upbringing to beculturally
deficient and did his best during my vacation stays with him to "purify" my French of stigmatized
belgicismes.

204
followed World War II, it is now considered bad manners in Belgium to
express class snobbery through the ostentatious use of French as a prestige
language. The "language question" has thus lost much of its earlier classbound bitterness. Although some residual linguistic snobbery lingers on, it
is much less openly expressed, and much less significant than it once was.
The "language problem," however, is not solved. Rather, it is becoming
more clearly a genuinely ethnic problem, rather than a class problem in
disguise. There are now basically three ethnic collectivities in Belgium
rather than two: the Walloons, the Flemings and the largely Brussels-based
Francophones who, whether of Flemish or Walloon origin, now use almost
exclusively French as their private and public language. These three groups
correspond, of course, closely to the three regions created in the 1962 and
1971 semifederal compromises. An interesting reversal in the perception of
who is the underdog took place, however, simultaneously with economic
changes.
The Walloons have always been in minority as compared to the Flemings,
and, traditionally, the Flemings have had a higher birth rate than the Walloons. However, the Walloons had the social advantage of speaking the more
prestigious (and, on the European scale, the more useful) language. Therefore, the demographic gains of the Flemings through their higher birth rate
were canceled by the gradual assimilation of upwardly mobile Flemings
into the Francophone group. The two groups kept in rough balance.
Now the Flemings have lost much of their demographic advantage in birth
rate, but Frenchification has been greatly reduced, at least outside Brussels.
So, one may ask, does not that new situation lead to another state of "dynamic stability" in which everyone is happy? Alas, no. The Flemings no
longer feel like social underdogs, but they resent the increasing dominance
of French in Brussels and the spread of Francophone dormitory suburbs of
Brussels into Flemish territory. The Flemings won the battle to expell physically some 20,000 Francophone students from the Flemish city of Leuven
(Louvain) and to dismember that famous Catholic university by forcing the
latter to establish the new campus of Louvain-la-Neuve on Walloon soil.
(Even the famous library was dismembered, on the basis of whether books
were odd- or even-numbered.) Nevertheless, the Flemings feel that they are
losing the capital, which they view as a cancerous French growth enclaved
in Flemish soil. (Brussels, unfortunately, is some 12 kilometers north of the
linguistic frontier.) The Gallicization of Brussels is made all the more inevitable through its increased status as the capital of the European Community and the NATO alliance. In a great international, cosmopolitan city,
Dutch has no chance against French.
Are the Francophones, at least, happy? Far from it. The Walloons feel
increasingly beleaguered, not only because they are a permanent minority,
but because the economic developments of the last 30 years have not been
kind to Wallonia. Wallonia, the traditional industrial heartland of Belgium
now has an antiquated coal-mining and steel industry and a depressed
economy, while the Flemish part of the country is teeming with new in-

205
dustrial plants brought in by massive foreign and domestic investments
during the postwar "economic miracle". Flanders, the rural backwater in
the 19th century, has become the prosperous and dynamic center of the
economy. This trend is, of course, greatly accelerated by the fact that the
main harbor (Antwerp) and the capital are both on Flemish soil and a mere
40 kilometers apart.
How about the Francophone Bruxellois? Are they not content? By all
accounts, they are winning, both linguistically and economically. They live
in one of the world's most prosperous, livable and cosmopolitan capitals,
and it would seem that their only legitimate complaint should be the dreary,
rainy weather. But they too feel beleaguered and unhappy. They are conscious of their linguistic insularity which, should Belgium break up, would
leave them isolated. They also feel hampered in their urban expansion by
the resistance of Flemish communes to the sprawl of dormitory suburbs,
and they resent having, in some cases, to send their children to Flemish
communal schools.
Both Francophones and Walloons, in reaction against the Flemish nationalist Volksunie, have therefore organized into dissident political groups
of their own. The main Walloon group is antimonarchist and advocates
annexation to France, but the Brussels Francophone group is little more
than a discontented bourgeoisie.
For all its problems, there is no workable alternative to CD for Belgium.
Partition would be disastrous to Brussels, leaving its Francophone population stranded. Furthermore, not every inhabitant is clearly classifiable as
Francophone or Neerlandophone. Guest workers of many nationalities, but
principally from North Africa and Mediterranean Europe now make up a
sizeable proportion of the population, and many are there to stay. Most are
still fluent in neither French nor Dutch. Then, there is a small Germanspeaking minority of about 1% in the southeast. (Belgium was foolish enough
to annex some German territory after World War I, as a reward for having
been on the winning side of the war.)
Perhaps as many as 10% to 15% of the population are so fluently bilingual
that it makes little sense to ask what their home language is. (The 1947
language census gave 18% of the Belgian population as bilingual, but this
did not necessarily mean that as many were fluent in both languages.) There
is some intermarriage between Flemings and Walloons, which further blurs
ethnic boundaries. Finally, as we have seen, many ethnic Flemings have
become Francophones, but continue to regard themselves as Flemish in
some sense. Surnames, for example, are far from a perfect indicator of ethnicity or language use.
If all these categories were added together, one would come up with
perhaps one-fourth of the population who are not unambiguously either
Flemish or Walloon. Whether they like it or not, Belgians are stuck with
each other. The present system of CD has more than its share of conflict,
uneasy compromises, inefficiencies and inanities. But the alternatives are
worse.

206
Canada
With a population of about 24 million, the second largest land area in the
world (after the Soviet Union) and with one of the world's highest standards
of living, Canada can claim at least middle rank in the international hierarchy. Its classification as a CD applies only to relations between the two
main linguistic groups: Anglophones and Francophones. Many other groups
are, of course, included in the complex ethnic mosaic of Canada, and here
we can only give the barest sketch of the situation (Brazeau and Cloutier,
1977; Burns, 1971; Driedger, 1978; Kalbach, 1978; Mc Rae, 1974; Porter,
1965; Royal Commission, 1967-1970; Russell, 1966; Smiley, 1976, 1977;
Vallieres, 1969).* The remnants of the indigenous population of
Canada—Amerindians and Eskimos—now make up 1.2% of the total. They
are widely scattered, both inside and outside reservations, and their relationship to the Federal Government bears many similarities with the situation in the United States. A long history of wars, alliances, territorial
encroachments and broken treaties led to their conquest, displacement, gradual acculturation (often not accompanied by assimilation) and administration through a paternalistic system of internal colonialism.
The remaining 99% of the population are descendants of immigrants who
came during the last 400 years, overwhelmingly from Europe. First to come
were the French who settled along the St. Lawrence River and established
the colony of New France. (Quebec City was founded in 1608 and Montreal
in 1642, but explorations of the St. Lawrence began in the 1530s.) The
French fought and conquered the Indians, but they were also caught in a
vast imperial conflict with England for the domination of the North American continent. That conflict was decisively won by the British in 1763, and
the French, under the Quebec Act of 1774, found themselves reduced to the
status of a colonial people subject to what was essentially a system of
indirect rule under the British Crown. The separate identity of theQueb6cois
as French-speaking Catholics was protected (as were the privileges of the
French clergy and upper class), but their political subordination to Britain
made for a very unequal relationship.
Within 20 years of winning Canada against the French, Britain lost her
13 Atlantic Seaboard colonies to the rebellious settlers. The birth of the
United States reinforced, however, Britain's hold over Canada, for some
40,000 United Empire Loyalists left the young republic to settle in Ontario,
Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, thereby completing the encirclement of
French Quebec with a ring of English settlements. Still today, Franco-Canadians see themselves not only as a sizeable minority of 6.5 million among
some 17 million other Canadians, but as a small Francophone enclave in
a vast continent of some 240 million Anglos.
*The main source of information on Canadian ethnic relations, and especially on the French-English
division, is the monumental Report of the Royal Commission on Bilinguaiism and BiculturaJism,
published in six volumes between 1967 and 1970. Unless otherwise indicated, most statistical
data cited here came from the Report.

207
An abortive French revolt in 1837-1838 was followed by the Act of Union
in 1840, joining Upper and Lower Canada (Ontario and Quebec, respectively) into a territory with equal parliamentary representation of some
650,000 French and 400,000 English settlers. Thus Canada slowly evolved
from a quasicolonial relationship to an unequal partnership. The next important step was the passage of the British North America Act of 1867,
establishing modern Canada as a self-governing dominion of four federated
provinces within the British Empire. The BNA Act provided for official
bilingualism at the federal level and thus for a more equal relationship
between French and English Canadians. Uprisings developed in 1869-1870
and 1885 in the new prairie provinces of Manitoba and Saskatchewan under
the leadership of Louis Riel. The two Riel rebellions were coalitions of
French-speaking Metisses (as mixed French-Indian fur trappers were called)
and Indian groups attempting to resist European settlement, but they elicited
considerable French sympathy in Quebec.
Meanwhile, starting in the late 19th century, a new wave of massive
immigration from Europe further complicated the Canadian ethnic picture.
Some of it came from England and Ireland, but most new immigrants spoke
neither English nor French. They were Germans, Italians, Dutch, Poles,
Greeks, Portuguese, Scandinavians, Ukranians, Eastern European Jews and
others, coming in at a rapidly increasing rate since the 1870s, peaking between 1900 and 1930, at a rate well over a million per decade. Between
1901 and 1911, European immigration added 28% to the Canadian population (Kalbach, 1978). In 1931, barely over half (54%) of the Canadian
population had Canadian-born grandparents; in 1971, that percentage had
risen to two-thirds (67%).
The history of these European immigrants closely parallels that of their
counterparts in the United States. In one or two generations, they became
acculturated overwhelmingly to the dominant English language group and
assimilated to the fluid structure of an expanding society. They often had
to start out at the bottom of the socioeconomic structure, unless they came
with capital and professional skills, but, after two generations or so, they
became largely assimilated with the rest of the population. As in the United
States, there was a revival of European ethnic sentiment in the late 1960s
and 1970s, and a number of ethnic group leaders began to argue that they
jointly constituted a "third force" between the English and the French, but,
as assimilation continues at a seemingly unabated pace, this is probably a
passing fad. Currently, 58% of all Canadians speak English as their mother
tongue, and 28% French, leaving 14% for the "third force" of first- and
second-generation immigrants.
After a slump in the 1930s and 1940s, immigration picked up again,
starting in the 1950s, at a rate of about 1.5 million per decade. In absolute
numbers, these figures are comparable to those for the 1900-1930 period,
but, as the total population more than tripled from 5.4 million in 1901 to
21.6 million in 1971, the impact of immigrants was correspondingly reduced. However, a new aspect of that post-World War II immigration did

208
create a novel dimension to the problem. Until World War II, less than 1%
of the immigrants came from countries outside Europe. That percentage
rapidly rose from 6% in the 1955-1960 period, to 12% from 1961 to 1965,
to 23% from 1966 to 1970 (Kalbach, 1978). Much of it came, and continued
to come throughout the 1970s, from Commonwealth countries like HongKong, India, Pakistan, Uganda (Asians), Jamaica and Trinidad.
Canada has had small "nonwhite" groups for a long time—from fugitive
American slaves in the early 19th century to Asian immigrants later. But
they were too few and too dispersed to elicit much racism or hostility. Now,
Canada is belatedly discovering that, like Britain and of course the United
States, it is developing a "race problem." In some urban centers like Vancouver, where Asian immigrant groups have become quite visible, there is
considerable racism.
A detailed discussion of immigration and assimilation must wait for the
next chapter. Here, we are mainly concerned over the impact of immigrants
on the English-French conflict. Traditionally, the French have been antiimmigration, because experience told them that the great majority of immigrants, if they were not already English-speaking on arrival, assimilated
into the dominant English culture. There were some exceptions to that
general rule, such as Italian and Portuguese immigrants in Quebec who
tended to become French-speaking, but, generally, immigration was seen
by French Canadians as diluting the French component of the population
and, eventually, as threatening them with absorption into Anglo society.
These fears were further reinforced by the language statistics that clearly
showed a much greater tendency for the French to become bilingual or
exclusively Anglophone, than for the English to learn French. Some 13%
of Canadians are bilingual in French and English, but whereas 30% of the
native speakers of French speak English, only 5% of the Anglo Canadians
speak French (Royal Commission, Vol. 1, 1967, p. 38). The French always
resented this bilinguisme d sens unique (one-way bilingualism) in which
the burden of learning the "other" national language is almost always put
on them. The only two provinces of Canada where bilingualism in the
official languages exceeds 10% are the provinces with large French populations: Quebec (26% bilingual, 81% French) and New Brunswick (19%
bilingual, 35% French). According to the 1971 Census, of the two national
languages, 67% of the population speak only English (compared to 58% who
are native speakers of English), 18% speak only French (compared to 28%
native speakers of French), 13% are bilingual and 2% speak neither (Smiley,
1977). In fact, Francophones with 28% of the Canadian population, contribute 68% of the bilinguals.
As for rates of assimilation, the cross-tabulation of ethnic origin and
mother tongue also shows the asymmetry of the situation and the justification for French fears of absorption. Only 1% of Canadians of British ethnic
origin speak French as their mother tongue, but 10% of Canadians of French
ethnic origin have become native speakers of English, a disproportion of ten
to one in rates of assimilation to the other group (Royal Commission, Vol.
1, 1967, p. 23).

209
Despite the overwhelming trend for immigrants to be absorbed into the
English-speaking group and for the French group to lose up to a tenth of
its members through assimilation (especially outside of Quebec), French
Canadians have been remarkably successful is holding their own demographically. From 1881 to the present, Franco-Canadians have managed to
remain a steady 30% of the total population. The onslaught of massive
immigration brought the French percentages to a low of 28% in 1921; but
by 1941, as immigration was reduced, the French had recovered their 30%
share.
This extraordinary performance was made possible through a high birthrate. The phenomenon is known in French Canada as la revanche des berceaux (the revenge of the cradle).* In recent years, however, French
Canadian natality has dropped rapidly and converges with that of AngloCanadians. By 1971, the French percentage had dropped to 29, with further
declines anticipated (Smiley, 1977). The revenge of the cradle in losing its
clout.
What all these statistics show quite unambiguously is that the immigrant
situation is fundamentally different from the Franco-Canadian situation.
Immigrants come from a variety of home countries and are territorially
dispersed. Therefore, in a couple of generations, they acculturate and assimilate to their host country, and, naturally, they tend to assimilate to the
more dominant of the two Canadian (and Nofth American) cultures. FrancoCanadians, however, are likely to remain a separate nation. To be sure,
nearly a third become bilingual because of the material advantages connected with knowledge of English, and about 10% have become assimilated
into the English group. This assimilation, however, is almost totally confined to the provinces where Franco-Canadians are in small minorities.
In the glacis quebecois (the Quebec icefloat), the French hold their own
quite well. There they even manage to absorb 9% of the population of English
ethnic origin and many immigrants, like Italians, who speak another Romance language. Clearly, Quebec is a solid territorial basis for a French nation
in North America. Nearly 80% of the Francophone population of Canada
lives in Quebec, and 81% of the Quebec provincial population are native
speakers of French. There is another big concentration of Franco-Canadians
in some districts of New Brunswick adjacent to Quebec, where they make
up 35% of the provincial population. Everywhere else, the French are small,
scattered minorities, ranging from 8% in Prince Edward Island and 7% in
Ontario (mostly in Southeastern Ontario, next to Quebec) to less than 2%
in British Columbia and under 1% in Newfoundland. Where French Canadians are dispersed minorities, they suffer the fate of the European immigrants: they become gradually Anglicized.

*It will be noted in passing here that these countervailing trends of assimilation and natural
increase through higher birth rates, leading to stable ethnic ratios, show a "stable dynamic" quite
similar to that between Walloons and Flemings in Belgium. Ironically, however, the Francophones
of Belgium are in the position of the Anglophones of Canada, and the Flemings are analogous to
the French Canadians.

210
The touchstone of Canadian consociationalism therefore revolves around
three main issues:
1. The relationship of Quebec to the rest of Canada: Is Quebec to remain
merely one province among ten, or is it to become a separate state as the
French nationalists of the Parti Quebecois advocate?
2. The implementation of CD at the federal level: To what extent are bilingualism and biculturalism to prevail in the organs and the bureaucracy
of the federal government?
3. Anglo-French relations within the various provinces, but most particularly in Quebec: Are the provinces themselves to be bilingual, make
accommodations to their ethnic minorities and run themselves as CDs
at the provincial level?
On all three counts, the Canadian experiment in consociationalism is
showing every sign of failing. Precisely because there is a viable option to
the status quo, Quebec seems to be gradually sliding toward secession, a
process symbolized by the passage of Laws 22 and 101 fostering the development of Quebec as a monolingual French province and by the accession
of Rene Levesque and the Parti Quebecois to power in 1976. Previous to
1974, Quebec was officially bilingual and extended many privileges to its
Anglophone minority. Although the Parti Quebecois lost its independence
referendum in 1980, the issue is not closed, and the victorious Liberal Party
is committed to a renegotiation of confederation.
The scrupulous attempt by the federal government to implement bilingualism in the hiring of civil servants, the publication of government documents and the like, actually favored the French who had a much higher
proportion of functional bilinguals than the English. However, this did little
to defuse French nationalist sentiment, as the Federation merely perpetuates
the minority status of the French and gives them solid control of only one
province out of ten (albeit one of the two largest provinces). Official bilingualism of the federal level is seen by many French people as a kind of
inconsequential tokenism and by many Anglo-Canadians as a source of
irritation and needless expenditure.
As for consociationalism at the provincial level, it can be said that it
remained a dead letter everywhere except in Quebec, which was the only
effectively bilingual province, both de jure and de facto. Other provinces,
especially Ontario and New Brunswick, have made a few accommodations
to their French minorities (mostly in the provision of French-medium
schools) in areas where the French language is rather common but have
fallen far short of the bilingualism and protection of minority rights which
Quebec, until recently, offered its Anglophone minority. Once more, the
unidirectional character of this bilingualism irritated the French and fed the
fire of French nationalism. In the end, Quebec practically aligned itself with
the other provinces and became officially monolingual in French in 1977.
Ironically, official bilingualism, which was meant to be a symbol of CD,

211
became the very opposite: a rankling mark of inequality. Anglo-Canadians
expected the French to speak English and to extend them minority privileges
in Quebec, but overwhelmingly failed to reciprocate.
The real impetus to Quebecois nationalism, however, has been a class
conflict in linguistic disguise, much as in Belgium. Unlike in Switzerland
where ethnic affiliation is unrelated to class, in Canada, there are appreciable
differences in socioeconomic status between Anglo- and Franco-Canadians.
It is sometimes argued that Quebec is a poor province, a kind of Canadian
Appalachia. This is not, in fact, the case. Quebec is fifth among the ten
provinces in per capita income, somewhat worse off than British Columbia.
Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, but far ahead of the peripheral Maritime
Provinces and somewhat richer than the prairie province of Saskatchewan.
Striking class differences between the ethnic groups appear within provinces, especially within Quebec. What particularly infuriated and humiliated Quebecois was that, on their own home ground, where they make up
over four-fifths of the population, they were often treated as second-class
citizens by an English-speaking economic elite living in their midst and
arrogantly expecting privileged status. This was glaringly obvious in the
great metropolis of Montreal, an overwhelmingly French city, but, nevertheless, one where until the last few years virtually the whole of business
life took place in English.
In banks, luxury hotels and fashionable shops, customers were almost
automatically addressed in English unless they insisted otherwise. The elite
university, McGill, was entirely English-medium, while the French had the
plebeian Universite de Montreal. The English-speaking economic elite, both
Protestant and Jewish, lived in suburban gilded ghettoes, sending their children to elitist schools. The class split thus corresponded to a considerable
degree to a linguistic and religious split. The economic elite was Anglophone
and Protestant or Jewish. The French Catholics had, of course, an elite of
their own, largely an intellectual, clerical, professional and political elite
from which the leadership of the nationalist movement was drawn. But the
rural population, the lower-middle class and the urban proletariat of Quebec
was almost solidly French (or of recent immigrant stock).
The Royal Commission Report (Vol. 3, Part 1-2, 1969, p. 18) reveals that,
in 1961, the British minority of Quebec earned 140% of the provincial mean
for the male nonagricultural labor force, while the French earned 92%. Jews
were even wealthier, earning 178% of the provincial average. Indeed, the
French were doing worse than most recent immigrant groups like the Germans (112%) and the Ukranians (102%). Of the main recent immigrant
groups, only the Italians (83%) were below the French in income.
Interestingly, the differences between Anglo- and Franco-Canadians were
much bigger within the Province of Quebec than in Canada as a whole,
where Anglophones were earning 110% of the national mean and Francophones 88%. Thus, on their home ground, French Canadians had over twice
as big an earning gap with the English (a 48-point gap between 92% and
140% of the Quebec average), as they did at the federal level (a 22-point
gap between 88% and 110%). The problem of class differentials between

212
French and English is principally a Quebec problem created by the English
economic colonization of Montreal.
The similarities between the Anglophone minority in Quebec and the
Gallicized Flemish bourgeoisie of Flanders are striking. Both groups were
in fact a ruling economic elite made highly visible by its use of a foreign
language. The language problem was in both cases greatly exacerbated by
the class conflict, and, conversely, class conflicts were embittered by linguistic divisions. Radical French separatists, drawn overwhelmingly from
the French intelligensia, lost no time in analyzing the situation of Quebec
in terms of internal colonialism and domination by an Anglo-capitalist elite
with foreign links to the United States. Also, by analogy with the United
States Civil Rights movement, Quebecois were termed: les negres blancs
d'Am^rique (Vallieres, 1969). The situation was even worse than in Belgium.
Whereas the Frenchified bourgeoisie of Flanders was at least of Flemish
ethnic origin and remained bilingual, the economic elite of Quebec was
alien and made little effort to learn French.
It is against this backdrop of class conflict that Quebecois nationalism
must be understood. The recent political efforts to make Quebec monolingually French are thus much more than acts of nationalist fervor. They are
attempts by the French political, professional and intellectual elite to free
Quebec of foreign economic domination and, in the process, to substitute
themselves as the new ruling class of an independent country.
Quebec is not the only Canadian province where separatist sentiment is
widespread. The Western provinces, too, especially British Columbia and
Alberta, have also long had a keen sense of geographical regionalism—now
bolstered, in the case of Alberta, by gushing oil wealth. Indeed, the 1980
national election that returned Trudeau and the Liberal Party to power after
a brief Progressive Conservative interlude has shown a large amount of
East-West polarization. The strongholds of the Liberal Party, which overwhelmingly dominated recent Canadian politics, are the populous provinces
of Quebec and Ontario. This means that the Liberal Party establishment has
a strong stake in averting Quebec secession through a flexible policy of
concessions; without Quebec, it could not rule the rest of Canada.
The Federal policy of multiculturalism, promulgated and promoted since
the 1970s, is seen by some French nationalists as an attempt to depolarize
the French-Anglo conflict by multilateralizing ethnicity and stressing the
problems of the indigenous minority and the "Third Force" of more recent
immigrants who are neither French nor English. The "French problem" thus
becomes redefined as merely one among many and is by implication, to be
solved within a consociational framework.
Some also argue that powerful economic interests, both domestic Canadian and from the United States, have an interest in preserving the unity
of Canada. Certainly, the prospect of a flight of English capital from an
independent Quebec has been widely and as an argument (some would say,
a scare tactic) against secession. Personally, I see no reason why capital, of
whatever nationality, could not accommodate itself quite well to an independent Quebec unless secession would be accompanied by economic rad-

213
icalization. In particular, why should not United States economic interests
be able to deal just as well with two client states north of the border as with
one? A dismembered Canada might prove even more pliable and dependent
than a united Canada. Whatever the political outcome in this complex battle
of interests, the future of Canada remains clouded.
CONCLUSIONS
What have we learned from our quick survey of consociationalism in Switzerland, Belgium and Canada? Basically, that the prospects for CD are poor
at best and that consociationalist regimes rest on a fragile set of conditions
that can easily be upset. The Canadian experiment seems headed for failure,
a failure which appears all the more probable as Quebec secession is a viable
alternative. The Swiss experience, while relatively successful, really does
not count, for Switzerland is but a loose confederacy of largely self-governing
and monolingual cantons. As for Belgium, it limps along as a binational
state, not so much because the experiment is successful, but because the
alternatives are worse; an ethnic split would leave Brussels (and, by implication, much of the Belgian economic, political, intellectual and cultural
elite, both Flemish and Walloon) stranded. For Belgium, consociationalism
is a solution of last resort; for Switzerland, it is a convenience; for Canada,
it seems a failure.
The cards were deliberately stacked in favor of consociationalism by picking three prosperous and relatively peaceful countries with a long-standing
reputation for being democratic and libertarian. A random sample of countries that attempted some kind of CD would have yielded such ghastly
failures as Lebanon, Nigeria, Zaire and Pakistan-Bangladesh. Of the Third
World countries that attempted to institutionalize a democratic multinational state, only India has been relatively successful—miraculously so,
considering its economic and social circumstances. Among the socialist
countries, the Soviet Union claims success, but it hardly qualifies as a
democratic state, and it has seldom refrained from crushing dissident nationalisms by force, both within and outside its borders.
Despite, all this card-stacking in favor of the hypothesis that CDs can
work, our conclusions are definitely pessimistic. Success is exceptional,
and when it does occur, one can legitimately ask whether one witnesses the
success of democracy or simply a collusion of class interests between ethnic
segments of an elite.
SUGGESTED READINGS
The main theorists of consociationalism are Lehmbruch (1967) and Lijphart (1968a,
1977a) who mainly applied the concept to The Netherlands, Austria, Switzerland,
Belgium and Lebanon. The collection edited by Esman (1977) contains a number of
relevant pieces by Zolberg (1977) on Belgium, by Lijphart (1977b) on ethnic conflicts
in general and by Smiley (1977) and Brazeau and Cloutier (1977) on Canada. Works
by du Roy (1968) and Lorwin (1971,1972) are also quite good on Belgium. On Canada,
see the recent collection edited by Driedger (1978).

10
ASSIMILATION

Up to now, we have examined principally situations where social and cultural pluralism among ethnic, racial or caste groups persists. This is obviously not always the case. Indeed, much of the literature on ethnic
relations in the United States, developed by the "Chicago School" of sociology (Park, 1950; Wirth, 1956) around the European immigrant situation
in the eastern and midwestern states, assumed that assimilation was the
final stage of a four-phase cycle of ethnic relations. Contact was followed
by a period of competition, which was in turn followed by accommodation
and finally by assimilation (Park, 1950; Shibutani and Kwan, 1965). In
popular parlance, this was the "melting pot" theory of ethnic relations.
Later, this theory was refined into the notion of a triple melting pot along
religious lines: Protestant, Catholic and Jewish (Olson, 1979). With the
"revival of ethnicity" in the late 1960s and 1970s, the theory came under
even more severe criticism (Greeley, 1974, 1979) but, when all is said and
done, it is clear that, as far as European immigrants are concerned, the
American experience was one of rapid acculturation and assimilation (G.
J. Patterson, 1979).
Nor is the United States unique in this respect. Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, Brazil, Argentina and Israel are other countries that received massive numbers of immigrants from a variety of countries, managing to weld
them together into a relatively cohesive and homogeneous national culture.
It is therefore necessary to examine the conditions under which assimilation
takes place. Whether or not one finds assimilation ideologically attractive,
there is no question that the countries where it has taken place have, by
that token, solved many of the problems of political integration that plague
plural societies. For purely practical considerations of policy, therefore, it
is important to define the parameters of successful assimilation.

215
ASSIMILATION AND ACCULTURATION
Before we turn to that task, however, we must distinguish between assimilation and acculturation. I have already done so implicitly earlier when
dealing with other situations, such as slavery, but here I must clarify the
distinction more explicitly. The concept of acculturation developed by anthropologists like Redfield, Herskovits and Aguirre Beltran (Aguirre Beltran,
1957; Herskovits, 1938; Redfield and Herskovits, 1936) refers to the tendency, when distinct cultural groups are in contact, to "borrow" cultural
items (words, tools, techniques, values, clothing, styles, foods, etc.) from
each other. This process is recognized as extremely complex and far from
mechanical. Cultural items are often "reinterpreted" when "borrowed"; that
is, they often acquire different meanings and functions than they had in the
culture of origin. Also, the "borrowing" is seldom entirely unidirectional:
groups borrow reciprocally, so that all of the world's cultures are, to a greater
or lesser degree, composite growths of heterogeneous origins.
Nevertheless, in situations where one ethnic is clearly dominant by virtue
of numbers, technology, wealth, political power or a combination of these,
acculturation is predominantly unidirectional. Subordinate (or minority)
ethnies tend to adopt the language, religion and culture of dominant groups
much more readily than vice versa, because doing so confers advantages in
fitness. Occasionally, dominant minorities adopt the culture of the people
they conquered, because they are absorbed by sheer numbers. The Mongols
and Manchu in China, the Tuzi in Rwanda and Burundi, and the Fulani in
the Hausa states of Nigeria are cases in point. Dominant majorities, however,
stand in little or no danger of losing their culture.
Subordinate minorities, however, are under constant pressure to acculturate, because becoming like the dominant group almost invariably confers
social advantages. The whole history of the spread of religions and languages, for instance, is best understood not in terms of ideology, conviction
or natural superiority of one language or religion over another, but in simple
utilitarian terms. However they might rationalize their actions, people generally convert or learn new languages if they perceive some advantages. It
often pays to learn the ways of the rich, the powerful and the numerous;
in the process one becomes more like them and, by that token, often becomes
more acceptable to them. Conversely, only a few missionaries and anthropologists bother to learn the ways of the weak, the poor and the few, and
even they do it because they derive professional advantages from it.
Generally, then, the greater the disparity in numbers, wealth, technology
and power between ethnies, the more unidirectional acculturation is, and
the stronger the acculturative pressures on the weak, the poor and the few.
That is why slavery, for instance, almost invariably makes for rapid acculturation, as we have seen in Chapter 6.
Acculturation refers to the objective, observable markers that people exhibit in their behavior. What language do they speak? What religion do they

216
practice? How are they dressed? What do they eat? What family structure
do they have? And so on.
Assimilation, by contrast, refers not to the degree of cultural similarity
between groups, but to the extent to which a group that was originally
distinct has lost its subjective identity and has become absorbed in the
social structure of another group.
Clearly the two tend to go together. Indeed, acculturation is a precondition, or at least a concomitant, of assimilation—for how can one lose one's
sense of distinctiveness and be fully accepted into another group unless one
becomes fluent in the language and culture of the adoptive group? However,
if acculturation is a necessary condition for assimilation, it is not always
a sufficient condition. There are a number of cases of groups that, even
though they have acquired the culture of the dominant group, are prevented
from assimilating and are kept in a subordinate and structurally distinct
position.
Good examples of acculturated but unassimilated groups are the Coloureds in South Africa and Afro-Americans in the United States. These
groups, even though they are virtually undistinguishable by culture from
their dominant white counterparts in their respective countries, are kept
socially and spatially segregated and have consequently evolved a series of
parallel institutions (such as schools, churches, voluntary associations, and
the like) that are almost identical in cultural form to the same institutions
of their white counterparts, yet completely separate in structure. This cultural parallelism in segregation has been documented in detail by E. F.
Frazier (1965) for the United States and Dickie-Clark (1966) for South Africa.
A MODEL OF ASSIMILATION
Contrary to what the American experience might seem to suggest, assimilation is not to be taken for granted. Ethnic sentiment being, as I suggested
earlier, an extension of kin selection, it is deeply ingrained and, barring
countervailing forces, tends to endure. Its disappearance is problematic, not
its persistence. Left to themselves, people have a natural propensity to prefer
the company of those like themselves in culture and appearance, and to
behave favorably toward them because they are presumed to be, in some
sense, kindred. Conversely, those foreign in culture and strange in appearance tend to be rejected because they are presumed to be unrelated to one.
A realistic model of assimilation, therefore, must bring in a powerful force
to motivate people to behave otherwise, that is, in this case, to want either
to assimilate strangers or to be assimilated by them. That powerful force,
I suggest, is the maximization of individual fitness. Fitness is generally
maximized by behaving nepotistically (and, therefore, ethnocentrically),
but, under some conditions presently to be specified, kin selection may be
superseded by other considerations that in turn lead to assimilation.
Assimilation presupposes the coexistence of at least two groups. For the

217
sake of simplicity, let us build our model around two groups, although it
can readily be generalized to a multigroup situation. If individual self-interest (ultimately converted into biological fitness) is the motivating force
behind assimilation, it follows that, for assimilation to take place, the two
or more groups must initially be in an unequal situation. The more unequal
their relative position is, the more of an incentive members of the subordinate group have to be accepted into the dominant group. Conversely, if
change of group membership confers no advantages, the incentive to do so
is lacking. However, as we have seen, even extreme initial inequality (as in
slavery) is no guarantee of assimilation. This is so for two main reasons.
First, it takes two to assimilate. Assimilation is sought by members of the
subordinate group—granted by members of the dominant group. All combinations of these two sides are found. Some dominant groups are such
eager assimilators that they force assimilation on reluctant subjects, a policy
recently termed ethnocide, by analogy to genocide. (Ethnocide refers to the
deliberate destruction of an ethny's culture without physical extermination
of individuals.) Other dominant groups refuse to assimilate even groups that
have become culturally undistinguishable from themselves and that are
literally begging to be accepted. Conversely, some subordinate groups stubbornly resist pressures to acculturate and assimilate, while others are eager
to lose their separate identity and to be absorbed. For assimilation to take
place, therefore, it takes a convergence of desire for it from the subordinates
and acceptance by the dominants. The conditions under which this concordance of goals is likely to be found will be examined presently.
Second, desire for assimilation is the outcome of two countervailing
forces, the ethnically centripetal force of kin selection and the ethnically
centrifugal force of fitness maximization through other means. The balance
must favor the centrifugal force for assimilation to take place. A positive
centrifugal balance, in turn, can be the product of either a strong pull toward
the out-group or a weak pull toward the in-group. Subordinate groups may
be in a heavily disadvantaged position, yet retain sufficient cohesion and
solidarity to resist successfully the centrifugal pull of assimilation, and to
offer their members an effective network of kin selection and reciprocity.
That is, even subordinate groups can remain structually strong enough that
leaving them may be a chancy proposition. An individual may have to trade
off the uncertainty of acceptance into the high-status group for the certainty
of support in his low-status group of origin.
The reductionist model of assimilation we have just presented purports
to predict empirical outcomes on the basis of individuals making selfish
cost/benefit calculations of alternative strategies of ethnic nepotism versus
assimilation. The model applies both to subordinates' decisions to assimilate
and to dominants' acceptance of assimilation, although, as we shall see, the
considerations are rather different in the two cases. Crude and simple though
the model is, it generates propositions that seem in fact to be borne out by
empirical evidence.

218

CONDITIONS FAVORING ASSIMILATION
1. The greater the phenotypic resemblance between groups, the more likely
assimilation is to take place. (All of these conditions are to be understood
ceteris paribus.) This is so because the dominant group is readier to
accept as biologically related groups that conform to its own "somatic
norm image" (Hoetinck, 1967). Phenotype does not, of course, affect rates
of acculturation, and this explains why groups that are highly acculturated but unassimilated often are phenotypically distinct from the dominant group (e.g. South African Coloureds and American blacks).
2. The greater the cultural similarity between groups, the more likely assimilation becomes. This is so for two reasons. The greater the cultural
resemblance, the easier (and therefore the less costly) subordinates find
it to acculturate, a precondition for assimilation. The more culturally
similar the groups, the readier dominants are to accept subordinates as
biologically related.
3. The smaller a group is in relation to the rest of the population, the more
likely assimilation is. This is so because small groups often have fewer
resources and are therefore dependent on the rest of the society. The
smaller a group is, the more likely it is to interact with outsiders, especially to intermarry—the ultimate test of assimilation. (Concubinage
is frequent in the absence of assimilation, but marriage, especially if it
happens in both directions, that is with both men and women of both
groups marrying out, is probably the best measure of assimilation.)
4. Lower-status groups are more likely to assimilate than high-status groups,
because they have more to gain by it. Upper classes and middleman
minorities often fail to assimilate because little or no status gain would
result from it. Working classes that are ethnically distinct as well seek
in acculturation and assimilation an avenue of upward class mobility
and are therefore much more motivated to shed their ethnicity.
5. The more territorially dispersed a group is, the more likely it is to assimilate. Territorial dispersion interferes with intraethnic solidarity and
therefore reduces the benefits of nepotism.
6. Immigrant groups are more likely to assimilate than native groups, because immigration is typically accompanied by geographical dispersal
and a sharp reduction in the network of intraethnic ties (since the bulk
of the ethny generally stays behind). The immigrant is also at a disadvantage vis-a-vis the native and thus is heavily reliant on the latter.
Pressures to learn native ways are directly related to survival and success,
whereas retention of ethnic separateness frequently has the opposite
effect. The native, through experience, is generally better adapted to his
habitat than the immigrant. Independently of the geographical dispersal
that often accompanies migration, then, immigration puts a premium on
imitating the ways of the presumably better-adapted native. Acculturation, in turn, favors assimilation.

219
The profile of the group most likely to assimilate is thus: an immigrant
group similar in physical appearance and culture to the group to which it
assimilates, small in proportion to the total population, of low status and
territorially dispersed. These propositions should be tested by the method
of paired comparison, holding constant, as best as one can, five of the six
variables each time. My guess is that, in combination, these straightforward
variables would account for most of the variation in rates of acculturation
(measured by loss of mother tongue), and assimilation (measured by intermarriage) between different ethnic groups in the same country and of the
same ethnic group in different countries—or different regions of a country.
A systematic test of the utilitarian paradigm I just sketched, would take
a large research grant, years of effort and a monograph of several hundred
pages. Here I have only space for a few illustrations of the kind of data that
led to my formulation in the first instance. I will briefly cite some evidence
for each of the six propositions.
1. Phenotype clearly makes a difference for assimilation, in terms of acceptance by the dominant group. For example, blacks who have been English-speaking for several generations have been much less readily assimilated
in both England (Little, 1947; S. Patterson, 1965; Rex and Moore, 1967; Rex
and Tomlinson, 1979; Richmond, 1973) and the United States than European
immigrants who spoke no English on arrival. Physically undistinguishable
groups (e.g. the Koreans in Japan) can also be rejected and remain unassimilated, so looking alike is not sufficient condition for assimilation, but it
seems to be close to a necessary condition in a number of racist countries.
Phenotype seems much more salient a criterion of acceptance in some countries than others (the Japanese, for instance, seem much more racist than
the Chinese, thought both are about equally ethnocentric). However, I would
expect that, in any paired comparison of two matched immigrant groups,
one physically distinct and the other physically like the native group, the
latter would assimilate faster.
2. Cultural also makes a difference. Assimilation between two groups
speaking closely related languages is much easier than between people
speaking unrelated or distantly related languages: take, for instance, the
assimilation of European immigrants in Quebec (Royal Commission, Vol 1,
1967, p. 32). Of the major European groups listed in the 1961 census, all
except the Italians tended to have adopted English rather than French as
their mother tongue. (This, for reasons studied earlier, was true despite the
fact that 8 1 % of the Quebec population is French-speaking.) Of the Germans,
26% had become English-speaking compared to only 15% who became
French-speaking; of the Dutch, 40% versus 7%; of the Poles, 25% versus 6%;
of the Scandinavians, 57% versus 15%; of the Ukranians, 2 1 % versus 6%;
of the Russians, 49% versus 4%; of the Jews, 55% versus 2%. For the Italians,
however, the only speakers of a Romance language in that list, only 6% had
become English-speaking, compared to 14% who became Francophone. The
attraction toward the related French group was strong enough to overcome

220
the economic advantages of adopting English as one's home language.
3. The size of a group also matters. Compare, for instance, the fate of
American Indians in countries where they constitute a small minority of the
total population, e.g. in the United States (some 0.4%) or Canada (1.2%)
with countries where they are much larger minorities, like Mexico (12%),
Peru (25%) or Guatemala (43%). Different countries use somewhat different
criteria of who is Indian, so comparisons are difficult. Nevertheless, it is
readily apparent that the much smaller North American groups are also
much more racially mixed and Westernized than their Latin American counterparts. Many North American Indian groups have ceased to exist as separate cultural and social entities. The same is true, incidentally, of the
Brazilean Amazonian Indians, who also make up less than 1% of the national
population. So the difference is not one of north versus south.
To arrive even at the low figure of 0.4%, the American Bureau of Indian
Affairs has adopted a wide definition of who is Indian. It includes anyone
who is "one-quarter blood" or who claims affiliation to a tribal group. This
includes many people who are bilingual or even monolingual in English,
who are phenotypically undistinguishable from whites, and who indeed
often choose to "pass" as such. By contrast, Indians in Mexico, Peru, Guatemala, Ecuador and Bolivia are genetically overwhelmingly Indian, are
generally monolingual in their indigenous language, live as peasants in
distinct, self-conscious communities and are even more marginal to their
respective "national" societies than their counterparts in Canada or the
United States.*
4, The proposition that low-status groups have more of an incentive to
acculturate and assimilate than high-status groups is well-supported by the
behavior of numerous groups. For example, German, Dutch, French, Belgian,
British and Japanese immigrants made little or no attempt to acculturate or
assimilate to the population of the colonies they ruled. Even though they
were typically very small and territorially dispersed minorities, they deliberately lived among themselves, encapsulated in small privileged ghettoes.
Yet, members of these same ethnic groups, when they emigrated to countries
where they were just run-of-the-mill people, assimilated much faster. The
Japanese, for example, who are notoriously arrogant and stand-offish as
conquerors (or even as businessmen), also have a reputation for assimilating
successfully in countries as different as the United States and Brazil.
Germans who have a record of rapid and successful assimilation in the
United States and Canada where their status on arrival was generally lower
class or at best lower-middle class, seem to become entirely different people
in South America where their status is often very high. German hacendados
*Yet, ironically, it is the much more acculturated and assimilated North American Indians who
recently accompanied the other ethnic groups on their outburst of ethnic revivalism. There is no
counterpart anywhere in Latin America to the American Indian Movement (AIM) or to the "Red
Power" militancy shown by North American Indians. These revivalistic movements, far from
indicating a failure of assimilation, presuppose, on the contrary, a good deal of it. They are
attempts to reverse a process which, though not completed, is well under way.

221
or businessmen in countries like Argentina and Peru, for instance, are notorious for continuing to send their children to private German-medium
schools and for persisting in speaking German after several generations in
Latin America. Their North American counterparts, however, are often offended when one detects their German accent in English and generally avoid
speaking German in public (aside from a few self-contained, endogamous
communities of religious zealots, such as the Amish and the Mennonites).
Immigrants find it much easier to transmit their home language to their
children if the latter perceive that their foreign language is a social asset,
than if they sense it to be a stigma. It is, of course, the social status of the
immigrant community that determines the status of their language and,
hence, their incentive to assimilate or to resist assimilation.
5. Territorial dispersal negatively affects ethnic solidarity for the simple
reason that ethnics have in most cases to be in physical contact with each
other in order to benefit from ethnic favoritism. Conversely, the more territorially dispersed people are, the greater the opportunities for maximizing
fitness through contacts with outsiders, including intermarriage. Duncan
and Lieberson (1959) have shown the inverse relationship in American cities
between the index of spatial segregation and rates of ethnic outmarriage.
The more territorially compact an ethny, the more solidarity it can show,
holding everything else constant—and therefore the less of an incentive to
assimilate. The point is so obvious that imperial powers bent on committing
ethnocide have often resorted to territorial dispersal to achieve forced assimilation. The Incas of Peru, for instance, deliberately removed unassimilated groups from their place of origin and relocated them in the midst of
assimilated speakers of Quechua, the official language of the empire (Rowe,
1946).
The Romans deliberately dispersed the Jews after crushing their revolt in
70 A. D. Although it is true that Jewish communities survived as small
isolated minorities in many countries, there was nevertheless a clear trend
toward gradual assimilation in those countries where Jews were relatively
well-treated, as in the United States, Canada, Argentina, France, Britain,
Holland—and even in Germany until the Hitler period. This was particularly
true in Western Europe in the 18th century after several countries "emancipated" their Jews by lifting legal restrictions and separate status.
Conversely, groups that have sought to escape assimilation have frequently done so by staking out a piece of territory where they attempted to
isolate themselves and to create a self-contained society. Religious groups,
which in time may form ethnies, use that technique repeatedly: Mormons,
Amish, Mennonites and countless communes of various religious or political persuasion; the examples are legion (Kephart, 1976). In Bainbridge's
(1978) felicitous phrase, these groups undergo a process of "social implosion," whereby all ties to the outside are minimized. This strategy, in turn,
calls for spatial isolation. The greater the territorial concentration is, the
more chances such groups have to survive.
Countless national groups that show no tendency to assimilate themselves

222
to their neighbors when they live in compact concentrations readily assimilate when dispersed. For example, many immigrant groups in North America underwent a two-step process of territorial dispersal that closely
paralleled their process of acculturation and assimilation. They left their
homeland where assimilation was often not even a realistic possibility since
they were typically the majority population there. After their arrival in
America, they tended to reconstitute little urban ghettoes in an attempt to
recreate mutual aid networks of ethnic nepotism. This first phase of partial
dispersal was already accompanied by considerable acculturation. The next
step was upward social mobility and assimilation, accompanied by total
territorial dispersal. The ethnic ghetto exploded outward into the final suburban melting pot, sometimes leaving only the forlorn ethnic parish church
behind in a neighborhood recently "invaded" by the new wave of immigrants or by racial pariahs.
6. Immigration obviously heightens greatly the likelihood of assimilation
for the reasons already noted. The more isolated the immigrant is from
fellow-ethnics and the more the immigrant emigrates as an individual, the
more likely acculturation and assimilation are to take place. Thus, the slave
who often emigrates as an individual acculturates faster than the immigrant
who comes as part of a family unit. The isolated immigrant family in turn
is more likely to assimilate than the individual who migrates with a whole
community. Quite apart from the territorial dispersal that generally accompanies migration, immigration fosters acculturation and assimilation for
ecological and social reasons. The native usually knows best; it behooves
the newcomer to learn native ways, in part because the native's adaptation
to the habitat is in fact empirically tested and superior, and in part because
the native is boss (if indeed the native is). The safest strategy calls for doing
as the Romans, when in Rome.
An episode from my adolescence will serve as illustration. The scene is
on board a liberty ship traveling from Antwerp, Belgium, to Lobito, Angola,
in 1948. The trip took three weeks in relatively cramped quarters. The
passengers were nearly all Belgians; the crew was also mostly Belgian, except for the catering staff of waiters and cabin attendants who were Africans
from the then Belgian Congo. The Congo was the destination of the passengers, who quickly discovered that they belonged to two distinct groups of
approximately equal size. There were those who had never been to Africa
(or, in many cases, anywhere else outside Belgium), and those who were
returning to the Congo to continue a colonial career interrupted by the war.
The newcomers were at an instant disadvantage, a disadvantage that was
barely perceptible in Antwerp, but which became increasingly obvious the
closer we came to our destination. Understandably, the newcomers (condescendingly called les bleus by the "old Africa hands") felt they were on
the brink of a very adventuresome and somewhat dangerous undertaking,
and felt for the most part quite anxious about climate, disease, living conditions, diet and sundry problems of adaptation to a strange tropical environment. They were, therefore, constantly approaching the old hands for

223
information and advice, thereby undergoing a crash course in what sociologists call "anticipatory socialization" to their role as Belgian colonials.
Anxieties mounted as the ship traveled south, and as the weather became
hotter. The newcomers were, of course, doing their best to behave as the
old hands and to disguise or hide their ignorance of colonial ways. There
was one thing that gave them away more than anything else, however,
namely their opinions and treatment of blacks. Belgium at that time had
very few black residents, and most of the newcomers had had few, if any,
experiences in dealing with blacks. They had, of course, been exposed
through mission propaganda in church and through history manuals in
schools to stereotypes of African inferiority. But the official face of Belgian
colonialism was benevolent paternalism. Initial attitudes of the newcomers
toward the black catering staff on the ship were thus, on the whole, characterized by benevolent curiosity. Behavior was uncertain because the situation was totally new and unscripted. Some reacted through "exaggerated"
courtesy, calling, for example, the waiter Monsieur, whereas they would
have called him garcon had he been white.
All this uncertainty in interaction was a source of great amusement for
the old hands, who took it upon them to coach the newcomers in racism.
Newcomers would be told their "liberalism" and "benevolence" toward
blacks would not survive two weeks in Africa. Africans were little better
than monkeys, really. If you treated them well, they would abuse the situation and stab you in the back. They were a lying, cheating, thieving lot
who had to be kept under constant watch. If you did not lock up everything
of value in your house, your servants would strip you naked in no time.
You had to be firm with them. You would soon lose your illusions about
them. And so on.
To drive these lessons in colonial etiquette home, the old hands would
behave toward the Congolese staff on the ship with the callous discourtesy
that was the daily routine of colonial life. The polite term of address for an
African, they would tell the newcomers, was "boy" or "girl," but "macaque"
got better results and was, in any case, much closer to the truth. To some
newcomers' credit, these disquisitions on the way to treat blacks were sometimes met with skepticism, but most underwent an astonishingly fast transformation of both their attitudes and behavior. In their eagerness to conform
to the norms of the prestigious old hands, the majority of newcomers had
become confirmed racists by the time the ship docked in Lobito. The few
remaining "liberals," the old hands predicted, would soon learn better.
Undoubtedly, nearly all did.
For most, the mere three weeks on the ship had sufficed to bring about
their total assimilation into the Belgian colonial role and ethic. The fear of
ridicule, uncertainty about the unknown, and the clear perception by the
newcomers that racial liberalism made one an outcast in colonial society
had all driven home colonial lesson number one: racism is adaptive in a
colonial society. The anxiety of immigration and the status uncertainty
connected with the uprooting facilitated the suspension of rationality and

224
critical reason. I vividly remember that one of the newcomers who eagerly
adopted the epithet "macaque" in reference to blacks was a brilliant entomologist who lived to discover some 3000 new species of insects.*
THE AMERICAN MELTING POT: MYTH OR REALITY?
Between 1820 and 1930, 38 million people immigrated to the United
States—32 million of them from Europe (Burkey, 1978; Olson, 1979). Since
1930, over 7 million more arrived legally, not counting several million
illegal immigrants, principally from Mexico. Roughly half of that massive
influx took place in the period between 1881 and 1920. Nearly one-fourth
came in the first decade of the 20th century—8.5 million. The experience
of immigrants, and hence the answer to the question I have just posed, did,

however, differ greatly for various ethnic groups.

Broadly speaking, assimilation was easiest and fastest for the northwestern
Europeans, mostly of Protestant faith, except for the Irish who came earlier.
These groups included 7 million Germans, 4.7 million Irish, 3.1 million
English, 800,000 Scots, 2.5 million Scandinavians and 400,000 Dutch. For
the Catholic, Orthodox and Jewish groups from Mediterranean and Eastern
and Central Europe, the assimilation process was somewhat more difficult
but largely successful. These groups included 5.3 million Italians, 3.8 million Russians and Poles, 4.3 million from the countries of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, 600,000 Greeks, 600,000 from Spain and Portugal and
700,000 from France. The one million-odd Asian immigrants and the seven
to ten million Latin Americans encountered much more prejudice and resistance in assimilation, but their situation has improved rather dramatically
since World War II. For the 25 million blacks, whether descendants of
American slaves who are completely acculturated and, at least, sixth-generation American, or for the million or so more recent arrivals from the
Caribbean, assimilation remains as elusive as ever.
Differences in both culture and phenotype go a long way in explaining
this continuum. This was primarily a continuum of acceptance (or rejection)
by the dominant group, rather than a continuum of willingness to be assimilated by the immigrant groups. The more the immigrant group resembled
the dominant WASPs (White Ango-Saxon Protestants) in phenotype, language, religion and values, the faster and the easier the assimilation. Indeed,
the dominant ideology was drastically different depending on whether an
immigrant group was defined as white or colored. White immigrants were
*)ohn Stone reports similar findings in his study of white immigrants to South Africa. One of
his respondents gave the following description of his rapidly changing racial attitudes (Stone,
1973, p. 159): "You pass through three phases: first, you feel sorry for the native, which lasts for
a few weeks.. .. Then, for about six months when you begin to know and work with them, you
dislike them more than South Africans do; finally, things even up and fit into the picture and
you accept them for what they are." Stone's quantitative study of attitude change among British
immigrants to South Africa shows little support for the thesis that immigrants who were initially
racists selected themselves to emigrate to South Africa, and much evidence showing that they
became racists quickly after arrival.

225
put under considerable pressure to learn English, become United States
citizens and assimilate.
Within the large European contingent a clear dichotomy was made between "honorary" WASPs; i.e. Germanic and Anglo Saxon northwestern
Europeans and all others, and this invidious dichotomy was clearly embodied in the immigration acts of 1921 and 1924, imposing a quota system
favoring "better" immigrants from Protestant Nordic countries (Handlin,
1957). Indeed, discriminatory quotas were reaffirmed as late as the McCarran-Walter Act of 1952 (Olson, 1979). Nevertheless, the overriding principle was that white was right, and that all Europeans were basically
assimilable.
Far different was the attitude toward Asian immigrants. Chinese "coolies"
had been welcome to build railways in California, but, when the job was
done, agitation against further Asian immigration became intense, resulting
in the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882 (renewed in 1892 and 1902). The ban
against all Chinese immigration was symbolically lifted in 1943 when China
was a war-time ally, permitting the entry of 105 persons per year (P. I. Rose,
1974). However, as a reversal of this outburst of liberalism, persons of Japanese descent, whether United States citizens or not, were incarcerated in
concentration camps in 1942—a racist retaliation against Pearl Harbor.
Only in 1965, was the Asian immigration policy greatly liberalized. This
followed a dramatic diminution in the amount of anti-Asian prejudice and
a rapid increase in Asian assimilation (including, in the case of some groups
such as Japanese-Americans, high rates of intermarriage) in the aftermath
of World War II.
Latin American immigrants have been in a different position from Asian
immigrants. Some of them are phenotypically white, finding it no more
difficult to assimilate than Italians or Spaniards. The ease with which Cuban
Castro refugees, a predominantly white bourgeosie, assimilated is a case in
point. Puerto Ricans cover the entire color spectrum, and the darker ones
find assimilation much more difficult; however, since they are United States
citizens, they cannot be barred from the mainland. Mexicans, the largest
Latin American group by far, find it easy to enter illegally through a long,
poorly patrolled border.
Although Latin American immigrants face much racial and cultural prejudice, and thus assimilate rather slowly, many business interests (especially
in agribusiness but also in small labor-intensive industries) find them a
convenient source of cheap labor. Thus, business interests excercise little
pressure to stop immigration, legal or illegal. Ironically but understandably,
the main interest groups who want to stop illegal Mexican immigration are
trade unions and established Mexican Americans, who fear competition in
unskilled and semiskilled employment.
Returning to the European immigrants for whom assimilation has indeed
been a reality, the conditions were favorable. They were, by and large,
accepted, the more so if they resembled the dominant WASP in culture and
appearance. They were largely uprooted from their home cultures by long-

226
distance migration across the ocean (a trip of no return for most, until the
easy and cheap travel of the post-World War II era). They were territorially
dispersed in urban centers and surrounded by strangers. Almost wherever
they went, they were in the minority as soon as they left their little urban
enclaves. More importantly, they entered, for the most part, the bottom of
the urban occupational structure. They made up the unskilled and semiskilled working class of the booming American industrial machine.
Not all groups assimilated with equal ease and speed. Indeed, for hardly
anyone did assimilation come easily. Learning a new language and a new
way of life, enduring the ridicule of making mistakes and appearing foreign,
suffering the anxieties of a strange, uncertain world, being poor and at the
mercy of disease, death and unemployment (Social Security is less than
half-a-century old), all these were the fate of the immigrant, even of the
relatively "privileged" European. Little wonder that the first generation
sought to reestablish in the New World a cocoon of security, well-being and
Gemutlichkeit in the ethnic enclave. Ethnic sentiments are not that easily
discarded.
However, for the great majority, the ethnic ghetto was only a way-station
in a double process of assimilation and of upward mobility. Most immigrant
families stayed in the ghetto only for one or two generations. Children of
immigrants typically lost their ability to speak the home language, though
many still understood it. The third generation became overwhelmingly
monolingual in English and began to intermarry extensively. Since assimilation was a virtual prerequisite for upward social mobility, assimilation
and acculturation became symbols of successful attainment of middle-class
status. Conversely, remaining in the ethnic neighborhood, retaining ethnic
ties and speaking the "old language" became stigmas of failure and badges
of working-class membership. This led, of course, to poignant intergenerational conflicts between immigrants and their assimilated children and
grandchildren, but the attraction of assimilation was well-nigh irresistible
for most.
There are, of course, a number of exceptions. Some groups, usually religious zealots, like the Chassidic Jews, the Amish of Pennsylvania and
others, managed to retain their separate ethnic identity and to resist, indeed,
actively to reject, both acculturation and assimilation. Even these groups
have "lost" many of their members to "the world," but they have succeeded
in surviving as separate microethnies, even under unfavorable circumstances. Their methods for doing so are nearly identical in all cases. They have
attempted to recreate a territorial base by encapsulating themselves in an
urban ghetto or in a contiguous rural area. They impose a stern discipline
(usually religiously based) on their members. They strictly enforce endogamy (again often scripturally based) by ostracizing those who marry outsiders. They minimize and stigmatize all contacts with the outside world,
which is defined as corrupt and inferior. And they cultivate a fierce sense
of their own superiority: only they know how to live right and to do right.

227
Short of such fanaticism, assimilation for European immigrants in America
was virtually inevitable.*
This last statement has become unfashionable since the "ethnic revival"
of the 1970s. An entire academic cottage industry developed lately around
"ethnic studies." All sorts of books are being written, extolling ethnic heritages, discovering forgotten roots and asserting how unassimilated and unWASP most Americans are. The politics of this "ethnic revival" (or perhaps
better, ethnic fad) are complex, but nevertheless easily understandable. It
all began in the mid-1960s with an attempt by Afro-Americans to redefine
their situation in terms of ethnicity rather than race. A black pseudonationalist movement developed, which was doomed to failure since all the
conditions for successful nationalism were missing. Blacks lack a separate
and distinct cultural tradition, a contiguous territory and the necessary
resource base to make nationalism work.
What blacks do have, however, is an ability to frighten whites. The spectacle of the urban riots in Watts in 1965, in Newark and Detroit in 1967 and
in many cities after the assassination of Martin Luther King in 1968 led
many whites to irrational panic. This panic was privately translated into an
acceleration of the flight to the suburbs and of the consequent deterioration
of the central cities and their public school systems. Publicly, panic was
converted into a massive change of policy. Whereas the thrust of the civil
rights movement in the 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s had been the elimination of all considerations of race, now all kinds of government agencies
competed with each other to compel school authorities, employees and
others to pay great attention to race, to allocate resources on the basis of
racial quotas, to bus school children according to their skin pigmentation,+
to overlook seniority rules to atone for past racial guilt and so on.
Once these government policies spread, they set in motion a series of
ethnic shock waves. Since blacks had seemed successful in getting special
privileges by organizing as blacks, other minority groups followed suit in
self-defense: Chicanos, Amerindians and Asian Americans. But the whites
were not to be left out. The feminist movement copied, with very mixed
success, some of the blacks' tactics. And the "white ethnics" also became
active. My point is that the white "ethnic movement" is a tactical response
to the perceived threat of the black movement and does not, in any meaningful sense, constitute a reversal of assimilation—much less a failure of it.
The white "ethnic movement" is basically a conservative groundswell of
*It should also be mentioned, however, that larger numbers of immigrants opted for an alternative
to assimilation; namely, they returned to their country of origin. Many Poles did so, for example.
Presumably, a selective factor was at work, in this return migration: it was the older and the less
assimilated who returned, thereby accelerating the assimilation of those who stayed.
tBusing for school integration incidentally is a complete reversal of the famous Brown versus
the Board of Education decision of the Supreme Court in 1954. That decision said it was illegal
to bus school children out of their neighborhood to make them attend a school other than the
nearest one. The Court said that children must be assigned to the nearest school, without any
consideration of race.

228
mostly Catholic, working-class whites who find in ethnicity a respectable
banner around which to organize opposition to "affirmative action" and
similar government policies (Orlando Patterson, 1977). Jewish organizations, interestingly, have overwhelmingly opposed government policies that
are based on race or ethnicity, and they have advocated universalism. The
Jewish reaction is not surprising since Jews in the past have often been the
victim of ethnic or religious quotas and since their statistical overrepresentation in many highly skilled professional and academic jobs makes them
likely victims of reverse discrimination.
In conclusion, the white "ethnic movement" is really not an ethnic movement at all. Ethnicity here is an alibi for race and for class. Since whites,
unlike blacks, cannot openly organize on the basis of race without being
accused of racism or fascism, ethnicity provides a respectable cover for race.
As for class organization, it has a poor record of political success in the
United States. Since, however, the residues of European ethnicity (such as
ethnic residential concentration) are largely found in the urban workingclass districts of the eastern and midwestern cities, ethnicity is also a convenient proxy for class organization.
By objective standards, the melting pot has not only been a reality foi
European immigrants in the past; it continues apace today, if anything, at
an accelerating rate. Intermarriage rates, the ultimate tests of assimilation,
are telling. As late as the 1940s, 94% of Protestants married within their
religious groups (Olson, 1979). By the late 1970s nearly 40% of both Jews
and Catholics married outside their faith. The triple white melting pot that
some scholars thought to distinguish (Catholic, Protestant and Jewish) seems
to merge into a single one (Gordon, 1964; Kennedy, 1944; Peach, 1980).
Rates of ethnic outmarriage are even higher—and climbing fast. In the
1970s, Irish and German Catholics outmarried at a rate of nearly 70%; Poles,
Czechs and Italians at 50%; and French Canadians (in the U.S.) at 40%.
Even some of the groups traditionally regarded as nonwhites are showing
rapidly rising rates of intermarriages: about 50% for Japanese-Americans,
about 40% for Puerto Ricans and about 30% for Mexican Americans (Olson,
1979). Only blacks seem permanently excluded from the great American
melting pot.
ISRAEL: SETTLER COLONIALISM OR INGATHERING OF THE
EXILES?
Every people claims to be unique, and in some sense, of course, the claim
is true. But some are more unique than others. During some 5000 years of
recorded myth and history, the Jews have emerged as a people from the
Sinai desert in the second millenium B.C., survived Babylonian captivity
in the sixth century B.C. and preserved their ethnic identity during 1900
years of diaspora (after the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem by the
Romans in 70 A.D.). After losing about one-third of their numbers (six

229
million out of approximately 18 million) in the Holocaust of World War II,
Jews recreated a state and a nation in their historic homeland, reviving their
ritual language, Hebrew, in the process. Then, this new little state (some
600,000 Jews in 1948; 3 million in 1973) victoriously fought four wars (1948,
1956,1967 and 1973) against combined Arab forces that outnumbered them
more than 20 to one. (There are some 140 million Arabs now; in 1948, they
numbered about 70 million, although less than half of them belonged to the
front-line enemies of Israel: Egypt, Syria, Lebanon, Iraq and Jordan.) To be
sure, it did so with the material, political and military help of the United
States, then the most powerful nation on earth. Still, with that kind of
historical record, it is little wonder that the Jews have a sense of destiny
and make a claim to special divine attention.
Even while in the diaspora, Jews have, considering how few they were,
made extraordinary contributions to both Arab Muslim and European Christian civilization, producing much more than their share of philosophers,
artists, intellectuals, statesmen, entrepreneurs and other leading figures.
Other peoples have survived through centuries of territorial dispersal, e.g.
the Gypsies. Other groups have suffered terrible persecution. The Armenians, for instance, suffered their own holocaust at the hands of the Turks
during World War I, one generation before the Jews. But, except for the
Greeks, what other small nation has left such a mark on world history?
In any case, one Jewish achievement is quite unique: the recreation of a
nation out of a multitude of groups who, although they all claimed to be
Jews, had become extremely culturally and linguistically diverse and were
not even all religious. Jews in the diaspora had little more than the memory
of a historical tradition in common—a tenuous link indeed. Each Jewish
community in the diaspora had much more objectively in common with
Gentiles in their respective countries than with each other. As at least half
of world Jewry is not religious, Judaism for many is but a set of symbols
rather than a living daily reality. Zionism, the ideology that provided the
rationale for the recreation of the state of Israel, did not unite all Jewry
either, for it was largely an Eastern-European, Ashkenazic movement that
involved the more assimilated Western European Jews only peripherally
and the Sephardic-Oriental Jews hardly at all. Theodor Herzl, the father of
Zionism, was a Germanized Hungarian, a European intellectual and indeed
very much of a germanophile, who made only token attempts to involve
Oriental Jews in the Zionist movement (Elon, 1975).
How did the "Israeli miracle" come about? The Israeli nation was recreated by achieving two of the essential conditions of nationhood:
1. the establishment of a territorial basis through the foundation of the
independent state of Israel in what had been the British Mandate of
Palestine and
2. the adoption of a common language, Hebrew, which, in this case had to
be virtually resurrected from its moribund status as a ritual language.

230
That feat too—the successful revival in less than a century of a virtually
dead language—is unique in world history. Others have tried (e.g. the Irish
who attempted to revive Gaelic) but failed. Before independence, only a
couple of hundred thousand people spoke Hebrew, mostly as a second
language; 30 years later, Hebrew was used by over three million, at least
half of whom spoke it as their mother tongue. The feat of resurrecting Hebrew
as a modern language is analogous to, say, trying to create a Catholic state
with Latin as the official language to be adopted by Poles, Austrians, Irish,
Spaniards, French, and so on.
What kind of a state is Israel? There are two polar views as to the nature
of the Israeli state. One is the official Zionist ideology of the state; the other
is the radical Arab ideology. Both have a considerable measure of validity;
both are one-sided. Perhaps the most coherent composite view, and the one
closest to reality, is given in Smooha's (1978) masterly analysis. Let me
briefly state the two opposite views, starting with the official Israeli position.
The justification for the state of Israel (and for the Jewish sectarian nature
of the state) is that Jews have a long-standing historical claim to Palestine,
that they have had a continuous presence in the region and that they have
no other place to call their own where they can feel safe. The Holocaust is
always invoked as tragic evidence for the need of a Jewish state where Jews
are in majority and can control their own destiny. (Unfortunately, the Holocaust argument fails to impress the Arabs, at whose expense the state of
Israel was established, since they had nothing to do with Hitler's Germany.
To Arabs, the Holocaust was strictly a European, Christian affair, of which
they are made to pay the reparations.)
Zionist ideology calls for an in-gathering of the exiles into the land of
Israel to recreate a Jewish state. Therefore, every Jew has an automatic right
of admission, and Judaism is the official, established religion of the state
(which, however, also recognizes and entrenches special rights to the minority religions of Islam, Christianity and Druzism). Every Jewish immigrant
is subjected to strong ideological pressures to make a total commitment to
the Zionist state, to learn Hebrew as quickly as possible and to become
absorbed into the mainstream of the national Jewish culture. Intensive
courses in assimilation are made available (on a voluntary basis) to the
immigrants, in which they are subjected to a mixture of Zionist indoctrination and a total immersion in the Hebrew language. Hebrew is the main
official language, but Arabic and English are also given some official recognition as secondary languages.
Military service is universal for both Jewish men and women (except for
Orthodox women who can be exempted) and is considered a sacred duty
to the State. Although long ruled by the Labor Party with a strongly socialist,
egalitarian (for Jews), secular, welfare-state ideology, the Israeli State also
protects the special rights of the Orthodox minority (about 30% of the Jewish
population) who are much more conservative on a number of issues (such
as the status of women and the religious nature of the state). Official policy
is thus an uneasy compromise within the Jewish population.

231
Arabs residing within the boundaries of pre-1967 Israel number about
450,000 and make up 13% of the total population of 3.5 million. They are
about 76% Muslim, 15% Christian and 9% Druze (Smooha, 1978, p. 280).
They have the right to vote, and they elect a few members of the Knesset
(Parliament), but they are clearly second-class citizens with restricted rights.
All restrictions on the rights of Arabs are justified on grounds of the continuous state of war between Israel and its Arab neighbors—and the imperatives of survival.
The antithesis to this picture of Israel, as a refuge for a persecuted minority
and an egalitarian Promised Land for all Jews everywhere, is the Arab ideology of Israel as an aggressive, expansionist, militaristic, sectarian, racist
state—a belated extension of European colonialism on Asian soil supported
by the capitalist countries, primarily the United States. The evidence for
the view of Israel as a case of settler colonialism and an example of what,
in the South African context, I have called a "Herrenvolk democracy" [(van
den Berghe, 1965) meaning a democracy limited to the ruling ethnic or
racial group] is considerable.
Palestine, a piece of the Ottoman Empire dismembered after the Turkish
defeat in World War I, became a British Mandate. It was Britain that, in the
Balfour Declaration of 1917, first gave official "great power" recognition to
Zionist aspirations. At the outset of Zionist colonization, the Jewish population of Palestine was about 24,000 out of a total population of about
500,000 (Smooha, 1978, p. 65). When the British Mandate began in 1918,
another 65,000 Jewish immigrants had raised the total to about 100,000,
perhaps 15% of the total, if one takes natural increases of the Arab population into account. During the Mandate, Britain allowed (sometimes reluctantly, to be sure, because Britain was caught between the irreconcilable
demands of Jews and Arabs) considerable Jewish immigration. Hitler refugees from Germany in the 1930s more than doubled the Jewish population
from 175,000 to 400,000, raising it to 30% of the total population of Palestine.
In 1939, Britain began to try restriction of Jewish immigration, but, after
World War II, hundreds of thousands of Jewish survivors of the Nazi concentration camps clamored for admission to Palestine. The British found
themselves caught in the middle of an escalating civil war between Jews
and Arabs, so they withdrew in 1948. The United Nations 1947 partition
plan never had a chance to be implemented. Israel proclaimed its independence, May 14, 1948, and was immediately recognized by most Western
countries and the Soviet Union. It was jointly attacked by all its Arab neighbors, and a protracted War of Independence (1948-1949) followed, during
which hundreds of thousands of Arabs fled from Israel and Jews from the
Arab countries (principally from Morocco, Yemen and Iraq) fled to Israel.
Over the years, some 630,000 Jews immigrated from Arab countries, and
close to a million Palestinian Arabs became refugees in neighboring Arab
countries.
It is thus a matter of historical record that the Zionist movement is almost
entirely European in origin and inspiration; that about 90% of the 447,000

232
Jews who immigrated to Israel until independence came from Europe
(Smooha, 1978, p. 281), and thus that Israel does historically represent the
last wave of European overseas colonization; that Jewish immigration to
Palestine was on the whole supported by both governmental and private
(mostly Jewish) agencies in the main capitalist and colonial countries, principally Britain and later the United States; and that the State of Israel since
its creation has been under the protective umbrella of the Western capitalist
countries, again principally the United States but also Britain and France
(who were Israel's allies in the 1956 war against Egypt). Israel is thus seen
by the Arabs as a client state of the United States and a foreign European
enclave on Asian soil. A frequent historical parallel is that of the Christian
Crusader states of the 12th and 13th centuries, a parallel bitterly resented
by the Israelis but dear to the Arabs because, of course, the Crusaders were
in the end expelled after two centuries of precarious rule in Palestine. (The
parallel is very imperfect because the Crusaders came without women and
never numbered more than about 5000.)
The catalog of Arab grievances against Israel is a long one. Arabs who
have left Palestine, often in fear of their lives during the war, have not been
allowed to return to their homes. Except for the Druzes and the Bedouins,
who are considered loyal to Israel and who may volunteer for armed service,
Arabs are excluded from military service. Arab land rights are continually
encroached upon by Jewish settlements, and whole Arab communities have
been displaced by force. Arabs are subject to continuous and often humiliating vexations and surveillance. They are given "special rights" as separate
religious communities of Christians or Muslims. This means that, while
Islamic or Christian law is recognized by the State of Israel, Arabs are also
treated as communities apart from Jews, are administered through separate
quasicolonial agencies, go to segregated Arabic-medium schools and so on.
Whereas every Jew anywhere in the world has an automatic right of admission to Israel and a claim to Israeli citizenship, Arabs born and raised
in Palestine who fled during one of the wars are not permitted to return.
Arabs residing in the pre-1967 areas of Israel, and who have stayed since
the foundation of the state, have Israeli citizenship and the right to vote,
but their legal rights are frequently infringed upon by arbitrary actions of
the government. For example, entire communities have been illegally expelled from their villages for reasons of "security," despite a Supreme Court
ruling in their favor. In fairness to Israel, however, it must be stated that
Israel inherited its conception of a religious state with separate juridical
status to each religious community from the British Mandate, which, in
turn, merely extended the Ottoman millet system. Thus, the basic structure
of the Israeli state is, ironically, a Muslim-inspired theocracy which it shares
with its enemies.
The overall picture is quite clear. The State of Israel is benevolent, democratic, egalitarian and assimilationist for the 87% of the population of 3.5
million who are Jews. It is none of these for the 13% of the population (of
pre-1967 Israel) who are Arabs, nor, of course, for the Arab population of

233
1.2 million in the territories conquered in the 1967 war who are completely
excluded from the Israeli body politic and treated as a conquered people.
For the Arabs, the Israeli regime has indeed most of the features of a colonial
state, although it must be said that, by colonial standards, Israel's rule has
been relatively mild and benign. It is quite possible for an apolitical Arab
in Israel to prosper and to avoid unpleasantness, and it is not true that Israel
is a racist state in the sense that South Africa is, for instance. Another crucial
difference with classical colonialism is that the Jews, even though they now
make extensive use of Arab labor, have generally sought to dispense with
Arab labor rather than to exploit it.
The conflict between Arab and Jew is fundamentally irreconcilable so
long as one community (the Jews in this case) insist that Israel must be a
Jewish state. Irreconcilable interests necessarily lead to policies that differentiate sharply among ethnies and deepen antagonism. Deep antagonism is,
in turn, advanced as a rationalization for ethnic discrimination. Given the
present nature of Israel as a Jewish State, this vicious circle is inescapable.
So far, I have presented matters primarily in Arab-Jewish terms, but the
situation is made far more complex by a profound double cleavage within
the Jewish population. I have already alluded to the cleavage between the
30% of the Jews who are Orthodox, insisting that Israel must be a sectarian
state, and the 70% whose religious views and practices are tolerant and lax,
and who advocate secularism (although clearly Jewish secularism).
The other cleavage is the ethnic one between the Ashkenazim (literally
"Germans")—a term used to refer to most European Jews who, in Eastern
Europe, spoke Yiddish, a German dialect, or other European languages—and
the so-called Orientals (or Sephardim) who came mostly from Arab countries
and who are strongly Arabized in language and culture. There are also some
Sephardic groups who speak Ladino (a dialect of Spanish), Turkish, Bulgarian or other languages, but they are small and are generally considered
subgroups of the Orientals, though they are often socioeconomically close
to the Ashkenazim.
This ethnic cleavage between Ashkenazim and Orientals has been meticulously documented in Smooha's (1978) recent study, wherein he sharply
questions both the ideology and the practice of assimilation as propounded
by the Ashkenazic group and extolled by the Ashkenazic intellectual establishment (Eisenstadt, 1954, 1967). Jews from the Arab countries, even
though they are often more strongly anti-Arab than the Ashkenazim, are, in
fact, culturally and linguistically Arab and are still only partially assimilated
in the Israeli mainstream, as defined by the largely Ashkenazic ruling class.
Orientals make up 55% of the Jews in Israel, a proportion that is steadily
rising as their birth rate is much higher than that of the Ashkenazim
(Smooha, 1978, p. 280). Yet, they are in an unfavorable position vis-a-vis
the Ashkenazim. Their linguistic acculturation to Hebrew has been as successful as that of the Ashkenazim. (In fact, as Hebrew is fairly closely related
to Arabic, Orientals often find it easier to learn than native speakers of IndoEuropean languages.) But Orientals came from much poorer, less industrial-

234
ized countries and, consequently, started out with fewer "modern" skills,
less education, less capital and a "traditional" style of life, making adjustment to a brash frontier society like Israel difficult. For instance, the Oriental
family structure tends to be strongly patriarchal, with semisecluded women
and a high birth rate. These conditions make for very cohesive kinship
networks but render urban adjustment difficult because they contribute to
residential overcrowding and lower per capita income.
Smooha (1978) documents in great detail the sizeable and persistant inequalities between Orientals and Ashkenazim. Oriental family income has
risen over the years from about two-thirds to four-fifths of Ashkenazi family
income, but the greater size of the Oriental family reduces the Oriental per
capita income to roughly half (52% in 1958-1960, 48% in 1968-1969) of
the Ashkenazi per capita figure (Smooha, 1978, pp. 154, 282, 286). In fact,
in per capita income, the gap has actually increased because of a declining
Ashkenazi birth rate. This difference must be seen, however, in the context
of a rapidly increasing standard of living in the 1950s and 1960s for both
groups, but Ashkenazim improved their condition faster than Orientals.
Occupational differences also favored Ashkenazim. For example, 13% of
the Ashkenazim and only 2% of Orientals were in professional and technical
jobs in 1975; 58% of Ashkenazim were in clerical occupations compared
to 33% of the Orientals (Smooha, 1978, p. 157). Smooha concludes that the
occupational gap, too, has not substantially decreased since independence.
Educational differentials are considerable—but decreasing. Ashkenazim
have an average of three more years of education in median number of years
of schooling completed, but the gap has been reduced by six months between
1961 and 1975 (Smooha, 1978, p. 159). Incidentally, the difference in mean
IQ scores for Ashkenazim and Orientals is almost identical to that between
whites and blacks in the United States: 15 IQ points (Smooha, 1978, p. 162).
In the distribution of power, too, Oriental underrepresentation is glaring.
In 1973, for example, Orientals with 55% of the Jewish population made up
only 11% of the Cabinet, 17% of the Knesset (Parliament), 8% of the member
of the executive of the Jewish Agency, 25% of the members of the Central
Committee of Histadrut (trade union federation), 3% of top-ranking civil
servants, none of the 21 officers of general rank in the armed forces and
none of the 19 mayors of the largest cities (Smooha, 1978, p. 309). In several
of these and other fields, these figures, though low, represented increases
over the 1950s and 1960s, thereby indicating a concern by the Ashkenazic
power structure to co-opt some Orientals. This is particularly true in the
trade union movement (Histadrut) linked with the Labor Party.
The overall picture of Oriental-Ashkenazic differences is that they are
considerable and persistent, despite some narrowing of the gap in some
respects. Such success as has been achieved in reducing ethnic group disparities has been due largely to efforts in spreading mass education and to
co-optation of Orientals in some key positions through an Israeli version of
informal "affirmative action." Nevertheless, the gap remains approximately
as wide as between white and black Americans on many socioeconomic,

235
occupational and educational indices, and in performance on standardized
IQ tests. This is true in both countries despite an official ideology opposing
discrimination and actively promoting equality of opportunity.
In addition to being much poorer and less educated, on the average, than
the Ashkenazim and having a culture that makes them resemble the despised
Arabs, the Orientals are also phenotypically much more like the Arabs than
like the Ashkenazim. Although it would be an overstatement to say that
there is a racial distinction made between Ashkenazim and Orientals, it is
no overstatement to characterize Israeli society as clearly stratified into three
main ethnic groups: the Ashkenazim on top, Oriental Jews in the middle
and Arabs at the bottom. The Orientals are clearly an "intermediate" group,
sharing many of the objective cultural and phenotypic attributes of the Arabs
but belonging to the privileged Jewish group. Although the official ideology
of Israel is, of course, to assimilate the Orientals, the assimilation is far from
complete, as shown by endogamy rates. There is virtually no intermarriage
between Arab and Jew, and a strong stigma attaches to such marriages. In
fact, these marriages are legally impossible, except through conversion of
one of the spouses, since Israeli law, following the old Ottoman millet
system, forces everyone, whether religious or not, to marry according to the
religious rites of his or her ascribed religious community; thus, by law,
every religious community—Jewish, Muslim, Christian and Druze—is totally endogamous.
Between Ashkenazim and Orientals, it would be considered bad taste to
express prejudice against intermarriage openly; nevertheless, rates of intermarriage are well below the expected rate. However, they are on the increase,
clearly indicating a trend toward a gradual merging of the two groups.
Intermarriage rose from 11.8% of all Jewish marriages, in 1955, to 19.1% in
1974 (Smooha, 1978, p. 129). Given near parity of the two groups, the
expected percentage, if marriage among Jews were random, would be about
50%. (By means of comparison, the rate of Ashkenazim-Oriental intermarriage in Israel is well below the percentage of Jews who marry Gentiles in
the United States.)
The whole issue of assimilation raises the question: Assimilation to what?
The Ashkenazim, who are greatly overrepresented in all the leading institutions of Israeli society (academia, the officer corps of the armed forces,
the Kibbutz movement, the professions and the top political leadership),
have imposed their culture, their values and their view of the world and of
their society on the Orientals. To the Ashkenazim, it was axiomatic that
Israel was to be built along a predominantly European model, except for
the use of Hebrew as the official language. Not only was it the only culture
with which they were familiar; they actively rejected as abhorrent the obvious alternative, namely, an Arabized, Oriental Jewish culture. Everything
Arabic was the antimodel—the things that Israel was desperately striving
to avoid.
This blatant Eurocentrism of the Ashkenazim inevitably became translated into a kind of condencending paternalism vis-a-vis Orientals. They

236
were regarded as backward and in need of "uplifting" to Ashkenazi standards. Naturally, Oriental intellectuals resented this paternalism, but, at the
same time, they found it difficult to challenge it, much less to suggest the
Arabization of Israel. Yet, increasingly, Oriental intellectuals realize that
Arabization is perhaps best for Israel's survival. Not only are two-thirds of
the population of pre-1967 Israel basically Arabic in language and culture
(i.e. Orientals and Arabs combined), but differential birth rates are certain
to make the Ashkenazim a diminishing minority. Furthermore, in the macropolitics of the region, a culturally European Israel is even more out of
tune with the area than an Arabized Israel would be. By blending culturally
into the Near-Eastern landscape, Israel might eventually become less of a
sore thumb to its neighbors.
These ideas are anathema to many Ashkenazim, because they represent
the very antithesis of their vision of what Israel should be. If Israel is to
become Arabized, they argue, then it has no reason to survive, forgetting
that the most dazzling florescence of Medieval Jewish culture took place in
Muslim Spain and was crushed and destroyed by European Christians. Israel
is thus not only on the edge of a political conflict between Arab and Jew.
It is in the forefront of a cultural clash between Europe and the Arab world.
The real question is not so much how successful was the Israeli policy of
assimilation? Rather, the lasting historical question will be: Who is assimilating whom? The tide of history seems clearly against the Ashkenazim.
Again, the Jews, to survive, will have to assimilate to their unwilling hosts!
Given a climate of reciprocal cultural and political tolerance, they can make
a dazzling contribution, not only to their own society, but to Arab and,
indeed, to world culture, as they have repeatedly done in the past. If, however, they behave as European colonials, their long-range outlook is no
brighter than that of white South Africans, the other last sizeable European
population enclave in a hostile continent.
SUGGESTED READINGS
The study of ethnic assimilation has for long been almost co-extensive with the study
of ethnic relations in the United States, as is evident from American textbooks on the
subject (Barron, 1957; P. I. Rose, 1974; Shibutani and Kwan, 1965; Simpson and
Yinger, 1972). The works of Handlin (1951,1957) are classics on the subject. Recently,
the trend has been to emphasize continuing pluralism (Giazer and Moynihan, 1970;
Hraba, 1979; Newman, 1973). On Israel, the contrasting approaches of Eisenstadt
(1954,1967) and Smooha (1978) are instructive.

III
THE FORMATION,
PERSISTENCE
AND DEMISE
OF ETHNICITY

This page intentionally left blank

11
ETHNICITY AND
OTHER BASES OF SOCIALITY

The fundamental argument of this book has been that ethnicity is a special
basis of sociality, irreducible to any other, through often empirically overlapping with other principles of sociality. I have argued that ethnicity is an
extension of kinship and that the sentiments associated with it are of the
same nature as those encountered between kin, albeit typically weaker and
more diluted. I have gone one step further to link ethnicity with the sociobiology of kin selection, a step that is bound to elicit passionate rejection
and disagreement.
ETHNICITY AS KIN SELECTION
To restate the argument briefly, there is abundant evidence that natural
selection favored nepotistic organisms, because, by favoring kin, organisms
are contributing to their own inclusive fitness. Genes predisposing for nepotism will spread in an animal population, because their carriers thereby
enhance not only their own direct reproduction but also that of related
organisms which share certain proportions of their genes with the nepotist.
Indeed, nepotism seems to be an important—perhaps the most
important—basis of animal sociality. The most social and tightly integrated
animal societies, the eusocial insects, are made up entirely of a reproductive
couple and specialized, nonreproductive siblings.
It is admittedly a big leap to go from ants, bees and termites to humans,
but the hypothesis of kin selection in the furtherance of inclusive fitness
has received much corroboration from vertebrates, including mammals, and,
as anthropologists have long known, all human societies are organized on
the basis of kinship. Elsewhere, I have shown that even the most specific
and diverse forms of human kinship organization conform remarkably well
to expectations derived from sociobiological theory (van den Berghe, 1979a).

240
The leap is thus not nearly as great or as implausible as most social scientists
assume.
The next step in my analysis was an extension of the principles of nepotism from the nuclear and extended family to that group of intermarrying
(and thus interrelated) families that for most of human evolution (and still
for many people today) makes up the basic solidary social group, variously
called sib, deme, tribe or whatever. This constituted the elemental ethny—until
a few thousand years ago, a group of a few score to a few hundred people.
This was the fundamental peace-keeping group of people who saw each
other as related.
Over time, ethnies grew to thousands and even millions of people, and,
as they grew, their underlying kinship basis became, of course, correspondingly diluted. Nevertheless, underlying ethnicity, wherever it is found, is
some notion of shared ancestry, real or at least credibly putative. In the
absence of such a belief—however vague and generalized—the basis of sociality is not ethnicity but something else.
From the basis of ethnicity as an extension of kinship (most likely with
genetically selected nepotism), we turned to the markers of ethnicity, i.e.
to the outward signs used by people to determine whether others share the
same ethny or not. The more reliably, quickly and easily a marker is likely
to establish or discount common ethnicity, the more likely that marker is
to be used. Ethnic markers are usually cultural (especially linguistic), as we
have seen, because under most historical situations until recently, cultural
markers best differentiated even close neighbors who typically looked very
much alike.
RACE AS A SPECIAL MARKER OF ETHNICITY
"Race" as a primary marker of common descent is relatively uncommon
and recent, because it does the job of discriminating accurately only after
much rapid long-distance migration has taken place and then typically only
for a few generations before interbreeding blurs again phenotypical distinctions. I must, once more, reassert that I attribute no intrinsic significance
to phenotypes in determining group boundaries and, hence, no validity to
any classification of our species into rigid subspecies. Nor am I arguing that
we have an instinctive propensity to stick to people who look like us. Rather,
to the extent that we do so, we are "race conscious" only as a test of common
ancestry. The genetic propensity is to favor kin, not to favor those who look
alike. This is clearly shown by the ease with which parental feelings take
precedence over racial feeling in cases of racial intermixture.
We have not been genetically selected to use phenotype as an ethnic
marker, because, until quite recently, such a test would have been an extremely inaccurate one. Racism is thus a cultural invention, a simple one
to be sure, that is readily invented when the circumstances of long-distance
migration across a wide phenotypic gradient make "race" a good test of
kinship; there is no evidence that racism is in-born, but there is considerable
evidence that ethnocentrism is.

241
Racism is thus a special case of ethnic sentiment, using a phenotype as
an ethnic marker. Because, however, the markers themselves are largely
immutable, ascribed at birth and genetically inherited, societies that use
primarily phenotypes as ethnic markers are characterized by more rigid and
invidious intergroup relations than societies using cultural markers. In practice, many societies, particularly the complex large-scale societies that developed out of European colonial expansion since the late 15th century have
adopted a mixture of cultural and phenotypic markers of ethnicity. Nevertheless the analytic distinction between ethnicity and race is useful for the
reasons just mentioned.

CLASS AND CLASS CONFLICT
Ethnicity (and race, as a special case thereof) are thus extensions of the
principle of kinship. The basis of ethnic solidarity is nepotism. The two
other principal ways in which human societies are organized are reciprocity
and coercion. Two unrelated individuals can enhance each other's fitness
by cooperating in a mutually beneficial manner. Commonality of interest
is therefore another fundamental basis of sociality in human collectivities.
Broadly, we call human groups, organized for the pursuit of common interests, classes. Or, to utilize the useful Marxian distinction, a group of
people who simply share common interests constitute a "class in itself,"
while a group consciously organized for the pursuit of these common interests is a "class for itself."
The third basis of human sociality, coercion, is, in fact, intraspecific parasitism. It arises when one group of people uses force or the threat of force
to enhance the fitness of its members at the expense of another group.
Different classes, as I have just defined them, can (and often are) linked to
each other in such an unequal relationship of parasite and "host," thus
making for class conflict in the classical Marxian sense.
It can readily be seen that my analysis is generally compatible with Marxian class analysis. One fundamental limitation of Marxian class analysis,
however, is its reification of class as an entity superseding individual actors.
It is this reification of class that leads many socialist Utopians to expect
that, once class distinctions have been abolished in a society, then class
conflicts will disappear and general altruism will prevail. The first part of
the prediction is true enough, but the second is a non sequitur. Eliminate
exploitative relations between classes in a society, and you eliminate that
particular basis of group conflict. But if the entire society becomes classless,
then the basis of class solidarity, namely individual interest, disappears.
Selfish interests are even more likely to emerge than in a situation of class
conflict where overlap in individual interests can lead to solidary class
action. Classes organize, not in the abstract, but against other classes with
antagonistic interests; eliminate class differences, and you destroy the very
basis of class solidarity.
Class solidarity, then, is nothing more than the overlap in the selfish
individual interests of the members of a class. Workers, for instance, can

242
only be expected to join a trade union if, by so doing, they individually
benefit (or hope to benefit). That is, the benefit/cost ratio of unionization
must be realistically predicted to be greater than one for successful unionization to take place. A reductionist model of class conflict and solarity in
terms of individuals maximizing self interests is thus perfectly adequate to
understand "collective" behavior. Conversely, the reification of class adds
nothing to the model, and the gratuitous assumption of altruistic behavior
in classless societies is empirically falsified. That is why Marxism has been
so relatively successful in accounting for class conflicts (where it implicitly
adopted the individual reductionist model of classical economics) and such
an abysmal failure in predicting, much less changing, behavior in the Utopian societies it attempted to create. Socialism has always foundered on the
rock of individual selfishness. We are an organism biologically selected to
maximize our individual inclusive fitness.

ETHNICITY VERSUS CLASS
The two principal modes of collective organization in complex societies are
ethnicity and class. The former is based on some notion of common kinship;
the latter on common interest. The analytical distinction between these two
types of social formation is crucial; both are, in principle, equally important,
and neither is reducible to the other. They are fundamentally different in
nature, and trying to redefine one as a special manifestation of the other
impoverishes our understanding of plural societies (Leo Kuper, 1974; Leo
Kuper and M. G. Smith, 1969).
Ethnicity tends to be the more permanent and the more basic of the two.
Since it is based on common descent, changes in ethnic consciousness and
boundaries, while they can and do occur, are contained within the limits
of people's perceptions of biological relatedness. Thus, for example, ethnic
boundaries can extend in scope by lumping together related groups that
hitherto saw each other as different; conversely ethnic solidarity can break
down into smaller components. Also, the salience of ethnic sentiments and
the extent to which they can be mobilized for political purposes can fluctuate
greatly in short periods of time.
All these changes, however, take place within a preexisting framework
of ties of descent and marriage establishing a newwork of kin selection and
sense of "we-ness" between people. Since descent, in the nature of the case,
also creates the possibility of cleavage between collateral branches at each
generation, the principle of fission and fusion (as called by British structural
anthropologists in analyzing segmentary lineage systems) also operates in
the definition of ethnic boundaries. This is why the latter often appear to
fluctuate widely and capriciously. A closer examination shows, however,
that these changes, while indeed responsive to environmental conditions
and politically manipulable within limits, are not random, taking place
within a preexisting structure with predictable lines of cleavage.
It will be objected that the sense of common descent in ethnicity is often
a fiction, which is true enough. But for such a fiction to be effective, it has

243
to be credible, and this cannot be achieved instantaneouly, arbitrarily and
at random. It takes time before an alien group becomes assimilated into an
ethny, and, as the assimilation process is accompanied by intermarriage,
generations of interbreeding to indeed transform the fiction into reality
again. Two previously unrelated groups can fuse into one breeding population after a couple of generations of intermarriage.
It will also be objected that, for modern ethnies of millions of people,
whatever biological relationship they may have is extremely tenuous at best,
and this is quite true. Indeed, feelings of ethnic solidarity are more easily
maintained in small, closely related groups than in large ethnies running
into tens or even hundreds of millions of people. Nevertheless, even in very
large ethnies, the basis of the solidarity remains the same, however diluted
it may be. Ethnocentrism appeals to sentiments that have evolved in much
smaller groups, and hence the appeal is often of reduced effectiveness, but
the appeal strikes a responsive chord to the extent that the larger group is,
in fact, a credible descent group. This typically can happen only after several
generations of common history.
A commonly noted feature of ethnicity is its "irrationality." Appeals to
ethnic sentiments need no'justification other than common "blood." They
are couched in terms of "our people" versus "them." The ethnic demagogue
does not have to argue from logic or to mobilize interests. He merely has
to activate preexisting sentiments of common descent. The most effective
way to elicit this elemental ethnic solidarity is to create the illusion (or
exploit the reality) of a threat by an outside group. Race riots, for instance,
flare up by the mere spread of a rumor that one of "them" killed, hurt or
simply offended one of " u s . "
The 1979-1980 seizure of hostages by Iranian militants at the American
Embassy in Teheran is a classical example of the mobilization of ethnic
sentiments. It elicited a groundswell of ethnic patriotism in the United
States, as well as a wave of irrational retaliatory actions against totally
innocent Iranians in the United States. Only a court injunction stopped, for
example, the Immigration Service from discriminately deporting Iranians
from the United States. It is also interesting how ineffective the Iranian
militants' actions have been in trying to capitalize on the main line of
cleavage in the United States. They released black American hostages in an
attempt to exacerbate racial divisions, but they were unsuccessful. The detention of the American hostages was seen by Americans not as the actions
of a small group of militants and not as an ideological struggle of Third
World peoples against capitalism, but as an affront of Iranians against
Americans.
Clearly then, ethnicity is more primordial than class. Blood runs thicker
than money. This, however, is not to say that ethnicity is always more
important or more salient than class. Nor is it necessarily the case that
ethnicity can always be mobilized more easily than class for political action.
Class solidarity, unlike ethnic solidarity, is dependent on a commonality
of interests, which must be convincingly demonstrated before class solidarity can become effectively mobilized. Even then, it is vulnerable to the

244
countervailing selfish interests of individual members of the class. A successful class organizer must persuade his target audience that they have a
selfish interest in organizing for this common interest.
Class is therefore an alliance of convenience, based on selfish opportunism. It is vulnerable to changes in circumstances and can quickly disintegrate, because a class is not a preexisting solidary community, but class
formation is not constrained by preexisting groups. Class groups can be
formed out of coalitions of disparate groups sharing only a common interest
in taking collective action. A classical example is the spectacular success
of Jarvis' Initiative 13 in California in 1978. It was not difficult to convince
California property owners that it was in their interest to vote themselves
a substantial reduction in real estate taxes. The appeal was strictly rational,
and it did not require any mobilization of ethnic or any other affiliation.
Some minority ethnic groups attempted to organize against the initiative,
because they tended to belong to the class that did not own property and
whose social services would be negatively affected by the initiative, but
they failed to organize an effective countermovement on a class basis, and
they resoundingly lost the fight.
THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CLASS AND ETHNICITY
Repeatedly in the case studies we examined in this book, we saw that class
and ethnicity, although they are clearly distinct principles of social organization, interpenetrate in complex and varying ways. Indeed, the interplay
of class and ethnicity is probably the most difficult problem facing the
analysis of complex societies. Empirically, a complete range of situations
is found, from a Swiss-type situation where the correlation between class
and ethnicity is close to zero, to a Peruvian-type case where the correlation
is close to one. In between are situations like those of Quebec or Northern
Ireland where there is some relationship between ethnic and class status—but
far from a perfect one. The intermediate situations are in fact the most
common, and the ones where class and ethnic conflicts are most intricately
intertwined. A priori, it is impossible and unwise to declare that one factor
is more important than the other. The relative salience of class and ethnicity
varies from case to case, and from time to time.
A few generalizations, however, seem to emerge from this bewildering
diversity of situations:
1. Class and ethnicity seem to be antithetical principles of social organization. As one waxes, the other wanes in relative salience. Basically, if
the cleavages are primarily ethnic, then the class divisions within the ethnies
are correspondingly muted. Typically then, each ethny in the common polity
is led by its elite. Each ethnic elite represents and acts on behalf of its
respective ethny. The country may be ruled by a coalition of such ethnic
elites, with each elite competing with the other for an ethnic distribution
of resources under their supervision. Alternatively, if there is a clear ethnic
hierarchy, the subordinate elite acts as a representative of its group and an
intermediary between the subordinate group and the dominant elite. Some-

245
times the subordinate elite turns nationalist and revolutionary, challenging
the dominant elite, but even then it is acting on behalf of and, presumably,
in the interest of its ethnic constituency, on whose support it relies. In all
the variants of situations of great ethnic salience, the class distinctions
within ethnies are secondary to the ethnic cleavages, and class organization
is difficult.
In the opposite case, where class conflicts take precedence over ethnic
cleavages, the definition of problems in terms of class interest militates
against ethnic solidarity. Such situations are less common than ethnic-salient situations, which seems to indicate that, if ethnic cleavages are marked,
they tend to take precedence over class cleavages.
The Andes of Peru are a case in point (van den Berghe and Primov, 1977).
There is a clear ethnic distinction between the Spanish-speaking dominant
mestizos and the Quechua- or Aymara-speaking Indians who are almost all
peasants. As there is a near identity of class and ethnic status (i.e. nearly
all Indians are peasants), it is a moot question whether Indian peasants are
oppressed qua peasants or qua Indians. The answer is that both factors are
at work, although, at the national level, class relations tend to take precedence over ethnic relations. Indians can, however, redefine their class position by leaving the land and ceasing to be peasants. In time, they learn
Spanish, become acculturated to local mestizo culture and assimilate into
the mestizo group in one or two generations. This class mobility open to
Indians automatically deprives Indians of potential leaders, since class mobility is almost inevitably accompanied by a change of ethnic identity. Thus,
the class dynamics of the situation strongly militate against an ethnic definition of conflicts.
2. Where ethnic cleavages are complicated by class differences between
ethnies, ethnic conflicts tend to be much more virulent. This is so because
the issues then often shift from the right of each ethny to autonomy, selfdetermination and cultural identity, to more radical demands for ethnic
equalization of resources and, hence, for an alteration of the class system.
Interestingly, the outcome is often not radical, for generally it simply leads
to the embourgeoisement of the formerly subordinate ethnic elite and a
duplication of the dominant group's class structure in the subordinate group.
Indeed, we are witnessing this process among American blacks. But the
demands for ethnic (or racial) equalization often take very strident forms
and elicit much conflict. Here again, we see that the ethnic definition of the
problem of inequality deflects from a class solution, even though the subordinate ethnic leadership often adopts radical-sounding rhetoric. Nevertheless, class differences are not irrelevent, for they aggravate ethnic
conflicts.
3. Both classes and ethnies vary greatly in their degree of openness and
rigidity, with complex mutual repercussions on each other. Broadly, where
class groups are rigid and where class mobility is difficult, classes tend to
acquire properties of ethnies. Conversely, where ethnic boundaries are fluid
and permeable, ethnies tend to acquire the properties of classes.
Examples of rigid classes are "estates" (Stande in German), semihereditary

246
occupational strata characteristic of pre-19th century Europe, in which social classes became much more than simply interest groups. Privileges of
rank, status, wealth and occupational skills were passed on hereditarily at
all levels of society: the nobleman passed on his title and lands to his sons;
the merchant willed his wealth likewise; the craftsman apprenticed his sons
and nephews, and so on. Therefore, each social class came, over time, to
acquire many of the attributes of an ethny, with its own distinct subculture,
style of dress, dialect, institutions and so on.
An even more extreme case of status rigidity is caste, as we have seen in
Chapter 8. Both castes and estates are thus "mixed" types of groups, sharing
some of the properties of classes (notably functional interdependence in the
system of production and complementarity in the division of labor) and
some of ethnies (including, most importantly, a strong tendency to be endogamous). The existence of such mixed types does not invalidate, of course,
the analytical distinction between class and ethny. It merely shows that the
tendency for the two to be in an antithetical relationship is not absolute.
Rigid classes tend to become like ethnies.
The reverse is also true. If ethnies are stratified but if the dominant group
does not resist acculturation and assimilation of members of subordinate
ethnic groups, then it can be expected that members of the subordinate
ethnies will seek assimilation into the dominant one as a means of upward
class mobility. We have seen examples of it in the assimilation of European
immigrants in the United States, the Gallicization of the Flemings in Belgium, the Anglicization of Franco-Canadians outside of Quebec and the
Mestizoization of Andean Indians in Peru. To the extent that this process
of ethnic assimilation of the upwardly mobile has taken place over several
generations, those members of the subordinate ethnic groups who have not
assimilated find themselves in an increasingly subordinate and marginal
position in both the class and the ethnic structure.
The Andean Indian case is an extreme one: nearly all Indians are peasants,
and nearly all peasants are Indians. The conquered ethny had become first
decapitated of much of its ruling class by the Spanish conquest and then
systematically deprived by interbreeding, acculturation and assimilation
over 20-odd generations of its more enterprising, successful and upwardly
mobile elements. It is little wonder then, that those who today still remain
Indian constitute, in fact, the bottom class of a highly stratified society by
almost any objective correlate of class status one chooses to adopt: illiteracy,
infant mortality, morbidity, life expectancy, per capita income or whatever.
Some scholars have termed such groups "eth-classes" (Gordon, 1964) or
"ethnic classes" [e.g. Rex and Tomlinson (1979) in their study of colored
immigrants in Britain}. Others, stressing the tendency for ethnically or racially differentiated groups in industrial societies to occupy specialized
niches in the division of labor, have spoken of a cultural division of labor
(Hechter, 1971, 1975, 1976, 1978). Others yet have explored the important
consequences of the existence of a "split labor market" by ethnicity or race
on intergroup relations (Bonacich, 1972). All these studies point to the
complicated relationship between class and ethnicity and the analytical

247
irreducibility of one to the other, much as some would like to try to be class
reductionists (e.g. Rex and Tomlinson, 1979). Indeed, Max Weber's classical
distinction between a class and a status group (Stand) was based on the
same distinctions we have drawn here, except that he did not clearly distinguish the ethny from the status group (Weber, 1968). Instead, he tended
to identify the two.
CLASS AND ETHNIC MOBILITY
If we dichotomize the degree to which people move in and out of class
and/or ethnic groups into "high" and "low," we can schematize the relationship between the two types of mobility as in Schema I. The schema
yields four logical combinations, which we have labeled A, B, C and D, but
only three of which are found in practice. Cell B is empty for reasons that,
by now, are fairly obvious. Given the inertia to remain in one's ethny unless
there are powerful incentives to change, it follows that, in a system which
offers little opportunity to improve one's class position, such incentives to
change one's ethnicity are lacking. Even attempts at forced acculturation
and assimilation are relatively unsuccessful if ethnic change is not supported by a system of positive rewards (such as access to better jobs, positions of power, high-status spouses and so on).
Type A societies—those characterized by low mobility in terms of both
class and ethnic status—tend to be rigidly and highly stratified by both class
and ethnicity. That is, they tend to be societies with a high degree of cultural
division of labor in which ethnies occupy specialized niches in the economic system. Since class position and ethnicity tend to be closely associated, there is a trend toward occupational roles being hereditary or
SCHEMA I A classification of societies by their class and ethnic mobility.
Class
mobility

low

high

Ethnic Mobility
Low

High

Type A
India
Ottoman Empire
Medieval Spain
Tuzi Kingdom of
Rwanda

TypeB
No clear cases

Type C
Nigeria
Belgium
Switzerland

TypeD
Peru
Guatemala
Mexico

248
semihereditary. If, say, Jews in the Ottoman Empire tended to be jewelers
and money-lenders because Muslims were religiously excluded from these
occupations, and if Jews had few other occupational outlets, then, obviously,
these specialized occupations would become semihereditary in Jewish families.
By contrast, Type D societies, which have relatively high rates of both
class and ethnic mobility, show much more dynamism. Yet, as in Type A
societies, the ethnic groups are sharply stratified and specialized, and class
status correlates highly with ethnic membership. Type D societies are thus
dynamic cases of the ethnic division of labor, in which upward class mobility and change of occupation is possible, but only at the cost of leaving
the subordinate ethnies and becoming absorbed into the dominant group.
The clearest examples of such societies are in those Latin American countries where the peasantry is heavily Indian and where Indians are nearly all
peasants. Indians thus constitute the bottom of a class system dominated
by the group (variously called mestizos, Jadinos or "whites") that, over the
centuries, adopted the Spanish language and culture and, at the time of
political independence from Spain in the 1810s, assumed power and became
the "mainstream" of the new "national" societies.
In Type D societies, the possibility to leave the land and enter nonpeasant
occupations is relatively attractive, since the rewards for doing so are often
substantial; but this can only be done by migration, generally to urban areas
that are mestizo-dominated, and by leaving the cultural and social matrix
of the local Indian peasant communities. Eventually this double process of
social and geographical mobility leads to a change of ethnicity as well. Even
in countries like Guatemala where ethnic boundaries are supposedly rigid
and castelike (Tumin, 1952), an analysis of changes in ethnic composition
between population censuses clearly shows a continuous process of ladinoization of the Indian population (van den Berghe, 1968).
The classic form of Type D societies is that of a multiplicity of fragmented,
atomized, localized but internally unstratified peasant groups that are ethnically distinct from the culturally dominant group. The latter, often a majority of the total population, is much more culturally homogeneous but is
itself highly internally stratified by social class. Indian peasants are thus a
fragmented "ethnic class" at the bottom of a double hierarchy of class and
ethnicity. They are dominated, both culturally and in politicoeconomic
terms, by a class-stratified "national" mestizo society, the upper class of
which rules the society (and traditionally owned much of the land cultivated
by the Indian peasants).
Another interesting feature of Type D societies is their brand of paternalism in which extensive networks of patron-client relationships cut across
both ethnic and class lines. In Latin America, this takes the form of compadrazgo, a ritual tie uniting the biological and godparents of a child and
the child himself (ahijado) in a life-long set of mutual obligations. One
generally seeks a class equal or a superior (but almost never a social inferior)
to become a godparent of one's child. Thus, most Indians seek out powerful
mestizos to become godparents (padrino, madrina) of their children, thereby

249
consolidating a close but unequal relationship across both an ethnic and a
class line.
Such ties almost invariably existed, for example, between hacendados
and their Indian serfs. This paternalism obviously had the effect of perpetuating a quasifeudal relationship and undermining both class and ethnic
solidarity among the Indian peasantry. The only tangible way of improving
one's lot was to seek the protection and favor of one member of the oppressor
class by maintaining a special, personal, privileged relationship with him.
Class and ethnic domination reinforced one another as both class and ethnic
solidarity was undercut by these particularistic ties of compadrazgo across
class and ethnic lines.
Type C societies—those characterized by a high degree of class mobility
but considerable ethnic stability—are markedly different from both Types
A and D. This combination of ethnic stability and class mobility implies
that one can change class status without altering one's ethnicity, and, therefore, that each ethny is internally stratified into social classes. To the extent
that each ethny has its own class system, the ethnies themselves are less
clearly stratified in relation to each other. Indeed, in some cases, the ethnic
groups are in substantially the same class position, and one finds a nearly
total absence of a cultural division of labor. Switzerland and contemporary
Belgium are cases in point.
Sometimes, there are ethnic inequalities as well as class inequalities in
Type C societies, but the overlap between the two is only partial. Nigeria
is an example. Southern Nigerians, who are largely Christians, are, for a
number of reasons traceable to the colonial period, greatly overrepresented
in the upper echelons of the "modern" sector, have a much higher literacy
rate, have far greater percentages of people with Western-style education
and a knowledge of English and so on—compared to Northern Nigerians,
who are mostly Muslims. Yet, despite these regional differences in levels
of development and "modernization," one cannot rank-order Nigerian ethnic groups in a consensual hierarchy of status. Each ethny feels superior to
the others, and each has its internal class distinctions and its elite that
represents it in "national" politics.
Since, in Type C societies, social class mobility is possible without changing one's ethny, and since the ethnies themselves are often not clearly
stratified, the incentives to assimilate are minimal. There is no point in
severing one's ethnic ties, unless this is the main (or, indeed, the only) way
of improving one's position. These conditions do not prevail in Type C
societies, and this absence of incentives to assimilate largely accounts for
the persistence of ethnic differences in these countries. It also accounts for
the relative absence in Type C societies of patron-client ties across ethnic
lines. Indeed, there is a striking contrast between Type C and Type D societies in the operation of networks of patronage and clientelism. In Type
C societies, patron-client ties are typically intraethnic. The elite distribute
favors and resources to ethnic clients, thereby reinforcing ethnic and familistic ties and heightening the salience of ethnicity, at the expense of class,
in the political game.

250
An overwhelming difference between African countries (most of which
tend to be of the C Type) and Latin American countries (mostly D Type) is
in the relative salience of class and ethnicity. In Africa, class conflicts tend
to be muted, while ethnic conflicts are seldom far below the surface. Conversely, in Latin America, ethnic conflicts are almost completely defused
through the mechanisms I have just discussed, and class conflicts, especially
within the culturally dominant mestizo group, are paramount. This again
points to the antithetical nature of class and ethnicity as modes of social
organization. Generally, but not necessarily, a stress in one factor is accompanied by a deemphasis in the other. At least, this seems to be the casein
terms of consciousness and solidarity. As principles of domination, class
and ethnicity often reinforce each other, as we have seen in the Latin
American societies of Type D.

CONCLUSIONS
Naturally, these societal types are but crude constructs to put some order
into an extremely complex reality and attempt some generalizations on the
interplay of class and ethnicity. At this level of analysis, we have used
general and abstract concepts describing processes at the collective level.
This is convenient as a short-hand device to describe a multiplicity of individual actions and decisions. In the last analysis, however, it is people
who modify their behavior in accordance with their individual interests.
Therefore, processes of ethnic change and persistence must be understood
in terms of a model of individual benefit-maximizing behavior. To this
model, we now turn in the last chapter.
SUGGESTED READINGS
The relationship between ethnicity and class has occupied a central place in the
literature, from the classics by Warner (1941), Myrdal (1944) and Cox (1948), to more
recent works by Bonacich (1972), Hechter (1975), Leo Kuper (1965, 1974), Rex and
Tomlinson (1979), M. G. Smith (1965a) and W. J. Wilson (1973,1978). Wilson's latest
book (1978) on the declining significance of race and the increasing importance of
class for American blacks has been especially controversial.

12
THE DYNAMICS OF ETHNICITY

Ethnic sentiments, as I suggested, have evolved as an extension of nepotism,
the ethny being conceived as an extended kin group sharing common biological descent. Yet, clearly, ethnicity is not a given nor a constant. It waxes
and wanes in response to environmental conditions. Groups coalesce and
split, form political coalitions and play the ethnic game in a wide variety
of ways. Some groups assimilate and lose their identity; others remain separate even under seemingly adverse conditions. Can one make any sense of
all this diversity? If ethnicity is primordial and rooted in the biology of
nepotism, how can it be so varied and rapidly changing in its manifestations?
There is, of course, no contradiction between a trait having a genetic basis
and its being highly modifiable under a range of environmental conditions.
A phenotype is always the product of interaction between genotype and
environment. Behavioral lability is especially to be expected in an intelligent, self-conscious organism like Homo sapiens, which can manipulate
situations to its own, conscious ends. Most aspects of human behavior are
several steps removed from their genetic underpinnings, and the observable
behavior is almost always mediated by a multiplicity of environmental conditions. Ethnicity is no exception. Unless our biological-ecological model
can account for variations in expressions of ethnic behavior as well as
regularities, it is seriously limited. In this last chapter, I cannot hope to do
more than suggest the elements of an answer, along the lines already hinted
at previously, especially in Chapter 10.
Sociality is always problematic for any organism. Organisms of the same
species are always direct competitors for each other, since they have adapted
to the same set of environmental conditions and make substantially the
same demands on their habitat. Therefore, mere aggregation exacerbates
competition; unless compensated for by countervailing advantages, animals

252
will seek to disperse. Any form, of sociality, i.e. of cooperative behavior,
between animals must, then, be shown to be fitness-enhancing. Unless animals can increase their fitness by cooperating, there is no reason for them
to stick together—and every reason to disperse. This is as true for humans
as for other organisms. At least, there is no reason to presume otherwise.
Like nearly all other higher primates (with the exception of the relatively
solitary orang-utan), man is a highly social animal, because his survival
depends on a minimum support group of at least 20 or 30 individuals, under
the conditions of hunting-and-gathering under which he evolved. It is this
basic cooperating, interbreeding support group of related individuals that
constitutes the template for the ethny. The ethny is thus the primordial
social group, the extended kin group, selected through millions of years to
maximize the individual inclusive fitness of its members through the operation of nepotism.
So long as our whole species consisted of such microethnies of hunters
and gatherers, problems of ethnic change were relatively straightforward.
Small, nomadic groups competed and occasionally fought with each other,
but their technology made the conquest of other groups unprofitable and
their extermination unlikely. Population fluctuated, of course, with the vagaries of the environment, so some ethnies became extinct while others
grew in size. But demographic success was limited by resources and technology. Bands split and merged, as can be seen among contemporary hunters
and gatherers such as the San of the Kalahari (Lee and De Vore, 1976). Few
of these ethnies were completely self-contained populations. Individuals
and small family groups migrated between bands and brought fresh blood
into the gene pool. At any given time, however, the band formed a fairly
well defined group of people, linked by kinship and marriage.
Boundaries and boundary-maintenance between human bands of hunters
and gatherers were, in short, not much different from what they are in other
species of gregarious primates and social carnivores such as hyenas and
African hunting dogs, though, of course, the specific mechanisms (aggression, scent-marking, acceptance rituals and so on) used to maintain, patrol
and defend boundaries are species-specific.
STRATIFICATION AND ETHNIC CHANGE
With the development of agriculture, "the plot thickened," for now ethnies
became much larger, much more powerfully organized and increasingly
capable of either conquering or exterminating each other. Ethnic relations
now had an increasing potential for being unequal, one group parasitizing
another. This was also the stage at which slavery made its appearance. As
we have seen in Chapter 6, slavery is one of the surest ways in which
individuals transfer ethnic affiliation and is thus a key institution in understanding ethnic relations. The slave's incentives to acculturate and to
become assimilated into the society of the master are, of course, great. This
calculus of individual gain explains the prevalence of acculturation and

253
assimilation in slave regimes. This is especially true for female slaves who
have the option to breed with their masters (indeed, who often do not have
the option not to breed) and thus to enter their masters' networks of kin
selection through their children.
When ethnic groups conquer each other as groups (as distinguished from
the individual capture of slaves), acculturation and assimilation are less
likely than under slavery because the conquered groups typically retain a
territorial basis where they can maintain solidary ties. The outcome of conquest situations varies widely. Sometimes it is the conquerors who become
assimilated by the conquered; this often happens where the conquerors are
a small nomadic minority who dominate settled agriculturalists by the force
of arms and who then engage in extensive polygamy with conquered women.
Examples are the Mongols in China, the Fulani in the Hausa states of Northern Nigeria and the Tuzi in the Central African kingdoms of Rwanda and
Burundi.
More often, it is the conqueror who assimilates the conquered. This can
happen even when the conqueror is a small minority (as the Spaniards were
in Mexico and Peru, for instance), provided that numerical disadvantage is
made up by a superior technology that confers signal advantages to the
conquered who assimilate. Literacy, firearms and more efficient uses of
energy introduced by the Spaniards in the Americas, for example, gave
Indians obvious incentives to learn Spanish ways, including the Spanish
language—the key to literacy and access to power.
Where the conqueror is sedentary and the conquered peoples are thinly
settled nomads, the outcome is nearly always the ethnic extinction or nearextinction of the nomads. This is less true of pastoralists (who have access
to greater and more marketable resources, can sustain larger population
densities and are often well organized for warfare) than of hunters and
gatherers or incipient horticulturalists. Basically, however, small, stateless
ethnies, with the triple disadvantage of small numbers, primitive technology
and decentralized political organization, have little chance of ethnic survival
in their encounters with conquerors. Either they are physically wiped out
by disease or genocide, or their social organization is shattered by conquest
and individuals loose their ethnic identity, drifting on the margin of the
conquering society.
Their fate is all the more tragic because they have few skills or goods
valuable to the conqueror, and therefore are not worth the bother to exploit.
Since, however, their primitive technology requires vast expanses of territory to sustain their traditional mode of existence, they are "in the way" of
the conquerors, occupying land that can be more intensively exploited with
more complex technology. Therefore, the natives get displaced; often this
is not followed by assimilation because they have so little of value to offer
their conquerors. The fate of Amazonian and many North American Indians,
Australian aborigines and the San and Xhoi-Xhoi peoples of Southern Africa
are examples of the tragic fate of such groups. Alcoholism, frequently introduced by the conqueror, is often a symptom of this displacement, fol-

254
lowed by aimless wandering on the margin of the dominant society. The
sociopathology of such groups after conquest is remarkably similar despite
great cultural differences between them.
Ethnic hierarchy between conqueror and conquered creates a complex
dynamic of ethnic change. The outcome is best understood as the product
of a multiplicity of individual strategies of fitness maximization, or, if one
rejects the biological viewpoint presented here, as the result of individual
cost/benefit decisions. On the one hand, membership in one's own group
offers one access to resources and social advantages not readily relinquished.
To the extent that the conquered group remains territorially intact (i.e. is
not displaced or scattered), is socially cohesive and is allowed cultural and
linguistic autonomy, the benefits of staying in an even low-status group
continue to be considerable—assimilation a less desirable option. (Besides,
assimilation may be resisted by the conqueror and thus not be an option at
all.)
Conversely, where the conquered group is spatially scattered with no
access to its resources and subjected to socially disruptive policies, membership in it has few benefits; assimilation to the dominant group becomes
correspondingly attractive. Inertia tends to favor the retention of ethnic
identity, but if the dominant group exerts strong pressures toward acculturation and assimilation or, at least, provides material incentives to assimilate, this inertia can be and often is overcome.
ETHNIC CHANGE: AN INDIVIDUAL CHOICE MODEL
Any close look at the processes of ethnic change (Aguirre Beltran, 1957,
1967; Barth, 1969; Monica Hunter, 1936; Philip Mayer, 1961), clearly shows
that the individual choice model presented here is the appropriate one.
These processes take place not at an abstract collective level, but as the
result of individuals making more or less conscious decisions dictated by
their perceptions of their self-interest. Examples are legion. Many Africans
during colonialism deliberately converted to Christianity because it gave
them access to literacy and a type of schooling that opened avenues of
upward mobility and a regular salary. In the Belgian Congo, for instance,
many young men cynically entered seminaries without the slightest intention of becoming priests, but simply because seminaries offered the best
available education.
In numerous situations, individuals are found consciously to manipulate
ethnic boundaries to their advantage. The way they dress, talk and behave
shifts abruptly and predictably depending on the context. Many people
literally "commute" culturally between ethnies, presenting an assimilated
front in one situation, but being "traditional" in another (Colby and van den
Berghe, 1969; Philip Mayer, 1961).
Sometimes this strategy is subtle and requires the precise opposite of
assimilation. If the dominant group rewards "traditional" behavior, this
calls for "playing the native." One of my Peruvian informants, for instance,

255
generally dressed in Western clothes in his village, but whenever he was
coming to the mestizo-dominated city of Cuzco (usually to deal with some
government official, lawyer or other high-status mestizo) he always dressed
in full, traditional, homespun clothing (van den Berghe and Primov, 1977).
In part, this was his way of dressing up: his everyday work clothes were
cheap, machine-made cottons, while his homespun clothes were his best
ones, reserved for festive and ceremonial occasions. However, when I asked
him why he always dressed as an Indian when he came to town, he responded by saying that he got more respectful attention in government
offices that way. He was thus deliberately playing "noble savage" to a reformist mestizo government that extolled the merits of Indian culture.
Numerous other examples of the manipulation of ethnic identity for gain
have been generated by the policy of "affirmative action" in the United
States. There too, when the dominant group rewarded ethnic divergence,
the latter was immediately forthcoming. All kinds of people suddenly rediscovered American Indian roots, or capitalized on their Spanish surname
or started "playin» the nigger" by affecting a lower-class ghetto accent. For
example, Hansen (1979) documented in detail this process of playing up
and manipulating ethnicity among American Indians in Seattle.
A different context in which ethnicity is consciously manipulated for
individual gain is in the fierce competition for access to positions of power
and hence to the public purse with its vast potential for graft, corruption
and embezzlement, which is evident in many "new nations" of the Third
World. In the African context, Andreski (1968) has aptly called the new
multiethnic ruling class of these countries "kleptocracies," and African
authors, like the Nigerian novelist Chinua Achebe (1959, 1966), have described in vivid detail how ethnic patronage and nepotism are not only
rampant but the expected and ethical mode of operation within a traditional
network of patron-client ties.
In my study of a Nigerian university, ethnic politics was also a highly
conscious game played by individuals for personal gain (van den Berghe,
1973a). Networks of ethnic patronage controlled by key academic and administrative personnel competed with each other over the spoils of the
university's resources and perquisites. Every appointment unleashed a fierce
competitive struggle between ethnic constituencies, in which the object of
the game was to manipulate and pervert to one's advantage the ostensibly
universalistic rules and procedures by which the university was supposedly
run.
To make my point, I have deliberately chosen especially blatant examples
of conscious manipulation of ethnicity for personal gain. This is not to say
that ethnic politics are always a thoroughly conscious and cynical game, or
that people do not often have deep ethnic attachments that they take seriously. Indeed, I have repeatedly emphasized the depth of primordial ethnic
attachments, suggesting a biological basis for its nonrationality. Rather, the
model of individual, fitness-maximizing choice is closely analogous, not to
say homologous, to that of classical microeconomics. Economists know that

256
buyers and sellers do not always act rationally and do not always possess
the necessary information to make the right decisions. Their model predicts
outcomes based on the assumption that actors will behave, consciously or
not, as if they were maximizing benefits and minimizing costs. No other
competing model yields a better description of actual behavior.
There is no incompatibility between, on the one hand, blind adherence
to one's ethnic group, right or wrong, and, on the other hand, the calculating
manipulation of ethnicity and the weighting of ethnicity against other types
of sociality, for individual gain. Indeed, nepotism itself is a fitness-maximizing game, albeit often an unconscious one. There are circumstances
under which the benefits to be derived from nepotism are superseded by
other forms of sociality. Because humans have a considerable capacity for
making conscious cost/benefit calculations, ethnicity can be rationally manipulated or indeed superseded by other considerations.
The crucial issue, therefore, is not so much rationality or consciousness,
which are merely mechanisms by which humans speedily adapt to rapidly
changing environments. Rather, the fundamental postulate of the model is
that organisms, consciously or not, tend to behave in individually "selfish"
ways, i.e. in fitness-maximizing ways. For humans, ethnicity is not the only
relevant consideration. Therefore, ethnicity can only be understood in relation to other social formations, and individual choices (again, more or less
conscious and rational) are the outcome of these competing pressures.
This model of ethnicity has the great advantage of resolving the apparent
contradiction, evident in much of the literature on the subject, between the
"primordialist" and the "instrumentalist" views. Ethnicity is both deeply
ingrained because it is rooted in the biology of nepotism and subject to
rapid fluctuations in response to environmental changes. For example, a
common phenomenon is the merging of hitherto distinct but related microethnies into larger entities. This typically takes place with an upward
shift in the scale of the polity. When a bigger state suddenly comes into
existence, the relevance of strictly localized affiliations becomes gradually
overshadowed by larger-scale politics. Small, local groups, suddenly thrown
into contact with more distant and unrelated peoples, discover their similarities and coalesce into larger groups. In turn, this formation of larger
ethnies gives people more weight in playing ethnic politics at the higher
level.
This process, which social scientists have sometimes called "supertribalization" in Africa (van den Berghe, 1971a), has happened repeatedly in
colonial situations—for example among the Luhya of Kenya and the Ibo and
Yoruba of Nigeria. Often, a seemingly trivial exogenous event, like the translation of the Bible by a foreign mission society, is the catalyst that brings
about ethnic coalescence. The one local dialect chosen by the mission then
becomes the standardized written tongue of an entire region, and a new
superethny gradually gains a higher level of ethnic consciousness. The process is only understandable, however, within the context of competition of
collectivities and ultimately individuals for scarce resources.

257

ETHNICITY AND CLASS AGAIN
As we saw in Chapter 11, much ethnic change, and in particular the problem
of the demise or persistence of ethnicity, must be understood in terms of
the interplay between class and ethnicity. These two alternative and competing principles of sociality make different claims on individuals, and have
different "pay-offs" in dissimilar sets of circumstances. In complex, stratified, and multiethnic societies, rates of assimilation are largely explainable
by the relative balance of costs and benefits of affiliating on a class versus
an ethnic basis, or of affiliating to one ethny or another if that option exists.
Generally, people resist assimilation, unless the benefits are overwhelming. One's ethnic affiliation is not lightly shed. The deep emotional attachment to one's ethny is the outcome of a multiplicity of previous beneficial
associations with one's kinfolk, in-laws and other intimates. These relationships are not easily replaced. They are not only intimate and based on
a trust born out of long-standing experience; they are also diffuse—that is,
they extend over the whole range of one's life and activities. Ethnic ties, in
short, constitute an all-encompassing matrix of intimate, affective relationships, conferring the multiple benefits of both kin selection and reciprocity.
An ethny is a social womb, largely coterminous with one's closest, longestlasting and most functionally significant ties.
By contrast, class ties are segmental. They affect only specific aspects of
our life, although admittedly the essential one of our material sustenance.
Furthermore, class ties, being openly utilitarian, do not commit one emotionally as do ethnic ties. Business partners or professional colleagues may
occasionally become intimate friends or in-laws, but they are not normally
expected to become intimates. One can resign from a trade union or a professional association in a way in which one cannot resign from a family, an
ethny or a caste. In the first case, life goes on largely unchanged; in the
latter, one "starts a new life."
The importance of ethnic ties can become especially crucial in the impersonal, anomic environment of a large city, where an ethnic group can
be the main and only mediating institution (outside the nuclear family)
between the isolated individual and a cold, hostile urban jungle. There is
thus nothing paradoxical or problematic about the survival of ethnic collectivities in an urban environment. Assimilation is not a simple function
of urbanization, "modernization," "Westernization" or any of these glib
concepts that were so popular in the social sciences of the 1950s and 1960s.
Rather, the tendency to assimilate is the product of a set of countervailing
costs and benefits for individuals behaving in certain ways. Indeed assimilation is itself a gross label that often provides a poor description of what
individuals do. Typically, people do not consciously decide to assimilate
or to resist assimilation. They simply take a multitude of small daily decisions to behave in certain ways in certain situations and differently in
others, according to their perceptions of what is most appropriate in each
case. "Appropriate" means in most cases doing what is profitable, what is

258
agreeable to others on whom one depends, what is likely to produce the
desired ends. In short, "appropriate" means "benefit-maximizing."
The language-learning behavior of young children is interesting in this
respect. It has been the distressing experience of millions of immigrant
parents that, as soon as their children enter school in the host country, the
children begin to resist speaking their mother tongue—even at home. Children, of course, quickly discover that their home language is a restricted
medium that is not useabie in most situations outside the home. When they
discover that their parents are bilingual, they conclude—rightly for their
purposes—that the home language is completely redundant. They thus start
using the language of the host country even at home, unless expressly forbidden or punished for doing so.
If, in addition to the greater use of the host country language, that language
is more prestigeful, then the process of linguistic acculturation is further
accelerated. Indeed, this is generally the case in many frontier-type societies
with massive immigration. Mastery of the new language entails success in
school, at work and in "the world." Mastery in the home language brings
few rewards by comparison: the smiling approval of a grandmother is but
slender counterweight to the powerful forces of assimilation. The home
language may even be stigmatized or ridiculed in the larger society, creating
a sense of inferiority and self-hatred in the immigrant child, who often
compensates through hyperconformity with dominant norms. Ethnic and
dialect jokes, for instance, can be powerful stimulants for acculturation and
assimilation.
However, if the home language of the child is more prestigeful than the
native language of the larger society, parents experience little difficulty in
maintaining its use. Then their children become either fluently bilingual
(e.g. the mestizos of Andean Peru) or monolingual in the minority home
language, as in most colonial situations. This shows that children must be
motivated to learn and use a language, and that their linguistic behavior is
readily predictable from the structure of rewards and punishments activated
by speaking one language as distinct from another.
Seldom do people learn a language as a consequence of a deliberate decision to assimilate. Assimilation is merely the long-range outcome of a long
series of minute day-to-day decisions to do certain things and shun others.
There is no overall mechanistic tendency to assimilate or not to assimilate.
Indeed, there is not even always a necessity to do one or the other. Stable
bilingualism or biculturalism, though it requires some effort and entails
some strains, can be a viable option too. For instance, there are many areas
like Germany, Switzerland, the Basque part of Spain, the Peruvian Andes
and others, where most inhabitants are fluent in either two languages or two
dialects of the same language (a local one and a "high" one of wider use).
People shift back and forth between the two, a phenomenon known among
sociolinguists as "diglossia"; but they do not do so at random. They clearly
differentiate the situations where they speak one as distinguished from the
other. Which is used is situationally determined according to complex and

259
subtle, but clearly nonrandom criteria, which are predictable because they
are benefit-maximizing to the language user. This process of manipulating
language use for personal gain is at least partly conscious, as shown by the
fact that people can often produce a reasonable rationale when asked why
they speak one language as opposed to another: ease of communication,
formality or informality of relationship, the marking of social distance, establishing a claim to superior status and so on.
With other aspects of culture, as with language, people modify their behavior more or less consciously in response to pressures and counterpressures. Religion, for instance, might be thought to be relatively resistant to
pressures to assimilate, since it is based presumably on deeply ingrained
convictions. There are, of course, plenty of cases of groups that obdurately
refuse to change their religion and, indeed, make religion the core of their
ethnic identity and the principal rallying ground for resisting pressures to
assimilate. But there are also numerous instances of opportunistic conversion. The general tendency is for people to convert from low-status to highstatus religions, as the spectacular progress of both Islam and Christianity
in Africa clearly shows. Religious conversion is frequently used as an avenue
of upward mobility.
People, then, tend not to assimilate, unless there are advantages to doing
so. The more general set of conditions making for assimilation (and acculturation) is one where ethnic groups are clearly hierarchized and overlap
territorially. The more sharply differentiated the "cultural division of labor"
(Hechter, 1976, 1978), the more social class mobility is necessarily linked
with a change of ethnic identity. An extreme example would be the Peruvian
Andean situation: to become anything but a peasant, an Indian must leave
his village and migrate to an urban settlement; but, to survive in town, he
gradually learns Spanish, adopts mestizo ways, and ceases to be Indian.
Success (usually small-scale entrepreneurial success in a small shop, or
wage-employment as a servant, day laborer or small employee) is synonymous with "deindianization."
Overlapping ethnic territories both reduce ethnic cohesiveness and promote relations across ethnic lines. This is especially true in an urban setting
where population density is high, and where interaction is both frequent
and impersonal. Under such conditions, mere convenience favors the use
of the dominant language as the lingua franca, thus heightening the incentives to assimilate. This explains why cities are ideal melting pots. Stable
multilingualism seldom survives long in a city. Generally, one language
achieves ascendancy—at least as a lingua franca in the public domain. Once
a language achieves that status, its higher prestige and utility further contribute to its spread.
The progress of French in the traditionally Flemish city of Brussels is a
case in point. English was in the process of supplanting French in Montreal
until the passage of legislation (Laws 22 and 101) aimed at reversing the
trend, making Montreal monolingual in French. Bilingualism is simply not
a workable alternative in either case. The sheer cost of having to establish

260
which language is most appropriate in fleeting encounters with strangers
is too high. A convention to use primarily one language in public is too
convenient not to be adopted, and once adopted, the other languages are
gradually displaced. African cities are undergoing the same process. Thus,
Swahili has become the lingua franca of multilingual Nairobi and Dar-esSalaam, gradually displacing even the formerly dominant English, not to
mention the other African languages. In Dakar, Wolof is doing the same to
French, Serer and other languages.
The same model of acculturation and assimilation as the product of a
multiplicity of selfishly motivated individual decisions also helps to explain
what aspects of culture change fastest and most slowly. For example, it has
long been noted that technology "diffuses" quickly and easily, presumably
because of the obvious advantages which it confers, but also, it has been
argued, because it can be easily divorced from other "deeper" aspects of
culture. Yet, we have seen how language and religion, presumably "deep"
aspects of culture learned in infancy, can also change quickly if the incentives to do so are strong enough.
Cookery, however, is notoriously resistant to acculturation. Often the last
aspect of their culture that immigrant groups retain, long after they have
lost use of their language, is distinctive cooking and foods. It can be argued
that taste for foods is deeply ingrained, being acquired early in life. But
there is much more to food than taste. As a food-sharing animal, humans
ritualize food consumption to the extent that some scholars claim to be able
to reconstruct a culture and its relationship to the natural world from table
manners (Levi-Strauss, 1979). There is no question, however, that cuisine
can be retained as an ethnic marker long after other aspects of culture have
been cast off. Why is there so little pressure to assimilate culinarily? Precisely because food-sharing is primarily a family ritual, reinforcing ties of
nepotism and thus, by extension, a good marker of ethnicity.
It should be noted here that the retention of ethnic cuisine is largely a
ceremonial retention that does not interfere with the enjoyment of other
foods, including the enjoyment of other groups' ethnic foods—or some commercialized version thereof. Italian-Americans probably do not patronize
fast-food chains and Chinese restaurants any less than other Americans, but
family reunions feature pasta and chianti. Interestingly, the Yankee ritual
meal par excellence, Thanksgiving Dinner, has become the ritual meal of
the American superethny. All the immigrant groups symbolize their new
ethnicity by feasting on foods originally alien to all of them!
It may seem frivolous to conclude a book about ethnicity on a culinary
note, but much of what social scientists have long treated as frivolous is in
fact essential to our nature. The old adage that we are what we eat is only
a partial truth. It stresses the environmental side of our existence. We are
also unique combinations of DNA molecules programmed to behave beneficently toward those in whom we recognize ourselves. Ethnicity, I suggested, represents a wide circle of recognition of kinship. As a food-sharing
animal that ritualizes communal eating among kin, eating together and eat-

261
ing the same things are our very human way of becoming more like one
another. They are also our uniquely human way of blending, quite literally,
nature and nurture.
That, of course, is precisely what I tried to do in this book. The propensity
to favor kin and fellow ethnics is deeply rooted in our genes, but our genetic
programs are highly flexible, and our specific behaviors are adaptive responses to a wide set of environmental circumstances. Ethnicity is both
primordial and situational. Any alternative view of it is, I firmly believe,
one-sided.



